REPORT Cybersecurity: The 2022 Board Perspective Board director views on the global threat landscape, cybersecurity priorities and CISO relations proofpoint.com 2 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Table of Contents Cybersecurity From the Top: The Board Perspective 4 Section 1: A boards-eye view of the threat landscape 5 Section 2: Cybersecurity posture and the boardroom 10 Section 3: Examining the CISO’s relationship with the boardroom 13 Conclusion: Actionable Insights for Board Members 16 Methodology 17 3 CCYYBBEERRSSEECCUURRIITTYY:: TTHHEE 22002222 BBOOAARRDD PPEERRSSPPEECCTTIIVVEE Proofpoint Proofpoint, Inc. is a leading cybersecurity and compliance company that protects organizations’ greatest assets and biggest risks: their people. With an integrated suite of cloud-based solutions, Proofpoint helps companies around the world stop targeted threats, safeguard their data make their users more resilient against cyber attacks. Leading organizations of all sizes, including 75 percent of the Fortune 100, rely on Proofpoint for people-centric security and compliance solutions that mitigate their most critical risks across email, the cloud, social media and the web. More information is available at www.proofpoint.com. Cybersecurity at MIT Sloan (CAMS) Cybersecurity at MIT Sloan (CAMS) is an interdisciplinary research consortium headquartered in the Sloan School of Management at MIT. In collaboration with researchers from departments around MIT and beyond, CAMS addresses the important need to improve the cybersecurity of all organizations through an interdisciplinary research approach focused on the strategic, managerial and operational issues related to cybersecurity. CAMS brings together thought leaders from industry and government with MIT faculty, researchers and students. The research consortium delivers its findings and actionable insights through published research papers, high-impact managerial outlets and a variety of meetings, workshops, conferences and educational activities. Find CAMS research in Harvard Business Review, Sloan Management Review, The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times and many other publications. Members of CAMS, whose support funds the research and who have first access to the findings, include companies from many different industries including financial services, energy, chemicals, healthcare, industrial automation, manufacturing, information services, natural gas, utilities and more. Please visit us at https://cams.mit.edu. 4 CCYYBBEERRSSEECCUURRIITTYY:: TTHHEE 22002222 BBOOAARRDD PPEERRSSPPEECCTTIIVVEE Cybersecurity From the Top: The Board Perspective Not long ago, few boards of directors knew much about cybersecurity risks, let alone took an active interest in the topic. That mindset has changed dramatically in recent years. But as this report shows, we still have some way to go. Overall, board members are confident they understand the threat landscape, prioritize cybersecurity appropriately and have invested enough to keep their organizations safe. Still, in light of rising rates of cyber attacks and differing and sometimes conflicting opinions among CISOs, this optimism may be misplaced. Bridging the disconnect is vital. CISOs and the wider board need open lines of communication. But often, boards are relentlessly focused on the bottom line and CISOs mired in technical language. Over time, effective business-first communication gives way to muddled perceptions and misaligned priorities. At a time when we are more connected and digitally reliant than ever, this board-CISO relationship has never been more important. It has also never been more challenging. To protect people, defend data and ensure continued organizational success, CISOs must communicate effectively with their boards. That means putting threats in perspective, fostering collaboration and driving accountability. At the same time, board members need to work to understand how cybersecurity risks can affect their organizations’ business goals. To explore the situation further, Proofpoint commissioned a survey of 600 board members at organizations with 5,000 or more employees across 12 countries: the U.K., the U.S., Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Australia, Singapore, Japan, Brazil and Mexico. Working with researchers at MIT Sloan’s research consortium, Cybersecurity at MIT Sloan (CAMS)1, we analyzed the responses and summarized the insights. We also compared some of the results to corresponding findings from our recent Voice of the CISO Report. We hope these insights help shine a light on how well CISOs and the wider board understand each other. This report would not have been possible without the participation of board members around the globe as well as our coauthors and research partners at CAMS. Thank you for your valuable support, insights and feedback. Lucia Milica, Global Resident CISO at Proofpoint 1 https://cams.mit.edu/ 5 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Section 1: A boards-eye view of the threat landscape Like any effective cybersecurity strategy, investigating the board perspective must start by assessing the threat landscape. Just under two-thirds of board members believe that their organization is at risk of a material cyber attack. This figure drops to 23% for those who believe the risk is very likely. These figures suggest a boardroom that is at least somewhat aware of the risk posed by today’s sophisticated cyber criminals. But we see a worrying disconnect when we compare these results with our 2022 Voice of the CISO Report (VOTC). Asked the same question earlier this year, just under half of CISOs felt they were likely to experience a material cyber attack within the next year, and 14% rated the risk as very likely. This disconnect held true around the world, with boards in many countries out of step with their corresponding CISOs. .S.U ecnarF .K.U napaJ ynamreG niapS eropagniS ylatI lizarB ailartsuA adanaC ocixeM Percentage of board members and CISOs who agree that their organization is at risk of a material cyber attack in the next 12 months. 80% 78% 78% 76% 72% 72% 70% 68% 68% Global 65% 66% 64% 60% 60% 58% N/A* 52% 50% 50% N/A* Global 48% 46% 40% 38% 34% 31% Board CISO *Brazil and Mexico were not surveyed in the 2022 Voice of the CISO report. Significant discrepancies emerged within industry sub-sectors, too. Board members in the financial services (73%), IT (73%) and manufacturing (70%) sectors believe they are at a higher level of risk than do their CISOs, who agreed 45%, 56% and 54%, respectively. That board members and CISOs are not on the same page when it comes to risk may not be surprising, but it is certainly very telling. Most CISOs know too well the difficulties of obtaining buy-in for cybersecurity projects. This difference in perceived threat levels is a significant barrier to the united front that is essential for a successful cybersecurity defense. “Board members have fiduciary and oversight responsibility for their organizations; therefore, they must understand the cybersecurity threats their organizations face and the strategy their organizations take to be cyber resilient. By virtue of their role in the organization, board members can have tremendous impact on cybersecurity posture, and our report illustrates that they take this responsibility seriously.” Dr. Keri Pearlson, Executive Director, Cybersecurity at MIT Sloan (CAMS) 6 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Understanding threat actors There are positives to take from board awareness of cyber attacks more generally. But it matters little if the C-suite does not also understand from where these attacks are likely to originate. That said, there is cause for optimism; board members and CISOs agree on the top concerns. Surveyed board members rate email fraud and business email compromise (BEC) as their top concern (41%), followed by cloud account compromise (37%) and ransomware (32%). This tracks closely with the concerns of CISOs, who also rank email fraud/BEC and cloud account compromise as top concerns (along with insider threats and DDoS attacks). Notably, board members and CISOs do diverge in one important area: insider threats were not a top concern for boards, but the No. 1 concern for CISOs. What, if anything, do you perceive to be the biggest cybersecurity threats within your organization/industry in the next 12 months? (Pick up to three) Email fraud Cloud Account Ransomware Supply chain (Business Email Compromise attacks attacks Compromise) (Microsoft 365, Google Workspace or other) 41% 30% 37% 30% 32% 28% 31% 27% Distributed Denial Malware Insider threat Smishing / Vishing of Service (DDoS) (negligent, attack accidental or criminal) 30% 30% 30% 29% 28% 31% 22% 28% Board CISO Most of these threats involve email—board members and CISOs alike are rightfully worried about them. Not only is email the No. 1 threat vector for all forms of cyber attack, but it is also the area with most scope for human error. No email protection is 100% failsafe. Some threats will reach the inbox; when they do, your people form the last line of defense. Just one errant click, rushed reply, or malicious download can have severe consequences for your organization. 7 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Analyzing the data by country and industry highlights the differences in board members’ perception of the biggest cybersecurity threats. 9 out of 12 surveyed countries consider email fraud/BEC one 8 out of 12 surveyed countries consider Cloud Account of the biggest three risks, with Spain (54%), Mexico (54%) Compromise one of the top 3 risks, with Germany (50%) and and the U.K. (52%) leading the way. Japan (38%) rating it the highest. Supply chain attacks are the top concern for board members Ransomware attacks are the top concern for board members in France and Singapore. in Canada. Email fraud is the top concern for board members at organizations across retail, IT/tech/telecom, education, healthcare, media/ leisure and public sector. For those in financial services, manufacturing and energy/oil/gas, cloud account compromise tops the list. The transport sector is by far most concerned about supply chain attacks. Assessing preparedness How prepared do board members feel they are to cope with a targeted Most board members are aware of the risk of cyber attacks in the near future. cyberattack in the next 12 months? But how has this translated into preparedness? CISOs and board members are Top 3 Countries Least Prepared aligned here—but the news is not exactly cause for celebration. Forty-seven percent of all board members believe that their organization is unprepared for a cyber attack, and about the same amount of CISOs agree. Japan 72% The alignment between board members and CISOs is relatively positive news, but their level of preparedness is of greater concern. Are only half of the world’s organizations really prepared for a material cyber attack? If so, what are they doing that the other half is not? And are they focusing on resilience or just Singapore protection? Are they actively and regularly training all users on what to do both to 62% prevent and respond in the case of an incident? These are all certainly possible. But if anything, it seems more likely that they are underestimating today’s sophisticated threats. They are likely focused primarily on protective measures, not ready to respond properly in the event of an attack. They U.K. may even have deemed the cyber attacks as “cost of doing business,” without 58% fully understanding either the risk or the impact to the bottom line. This misplaced sense of confidence continues when it comes to data loss. Overall, three-quarters of surveyed board members believe that their organization’s data CISOs feel least prepared in is adequately protected. Those in the U.S. (88%), Spain (88%) and Brazil (86%) Australia, U.K. and Germany. are the most confident. On the other hand, most also consider data loss a top concern, suggesting somewhat less faith in their data protection and recovery Board members in the education capabilities. sector feel the least prepared (62%). Those in energy/oil/gas Many also see data protection as an area in need of bolstering, with 75% of board and transport (both 23%) feel most members citing information protection and data governance as a top priority. prepared. Those in Brazil (92%), Japan (86%) and France (84%) agree with this sentiment the most. 8 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Spotlight on: The people problem Despite some overconfidence in how prepared their organizations are for a potential cyber attack, board members are under no such illusions when assessing their biggest risk factor: human error. Two-thirds (67%) believe human error is their biggest cyber vulnerability. That this is most keenly felt in traditionally stricter corporate cultures such as Germany (80%), France (78%) and Japan (74%) shows just how aware the world’s boards are about the role of people in cybersecurity. Controls, perimeter defenses and technology alone are not enough. With 82% of successful cyber attacks involving the human element2, our people are on the front line—and boards must protect them accordingly. Statistics show that most cyber attacks happen because of some type of human 67% error. That means making sure people throughout the organization, including board members, know what to watch for and what to do should they encounter a questionable email, link or website. Board members have both a personal and believe human error is the professional role to play. They, too, can be targets of cyber criminals who want to get biggest cyber vulnerability. into companies. Board members also have an oversight role to play as they evaluate the plans CISOs put forth to manage this problem. Counting the consequences Top concerns of board members in the event of a cyber incident. Board members were mixed when asked about the consequences of Around the world, the U.K., Canada, most concern. When asked about their greatest concerns in the event 37% Internal data France and Singapore view the becoming public impact of a material cyber attack on of a cyber incident, they ranked their organization’s reputation as the internal data becoming public (37%), most pressing concern. reputational damage (34%) and loss in revenue (33%) at the top. Board members’ top concerns clearly 34% Reputational reflected their focus on their broader damage oversight and fiduciary responsibility In Italy and Spain, loss in revenue is for the entire organization. the most pressing concern. While these are undoubtedly valid concerns, they are not the same as 33% Loss in those cited by CISOs in our earlier revenue report. As outlined in Voice of the CISO, Significant downtime is top of mind significant downtime is the number one for those in Germany and Australia. concern of CISOs (37%), followed by disruption to operations and impact on business valuation (36%). Operational downtime hits revenue streams and customers in direct and immediate Internal data becoming public was Significant downtime is of most ways. the top concern for board members concern to transport and retail, at IT/tech/telecom, healthcare, while disruption to operations worries manufacturing, media/leisure and financial services, business and public sector organizations. professional and energy/oil/gas. 2 Verizon. “2022 Data Breach Investigations Report.” May 2022. 9 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE This difference of opinion, of course, comes from the different perspectives each role brings to the organization. CISOs primarily see their role as keeping attacks from disrupting the business and as enabling the business to continue to function despite cyber attacks. At public organizations, however, board members represent shareholders. They are most concerned with protecting the value of their investments, which can decline when the organization suffers in reputational damage or lost revenue. Remarkably, the board members’ concerns varied by country and industry.. On the regulations front, a resounding majority of board members (80%) believe that organizations should be required to report a material cyber incident to the government within a reasonable timeframe. Just 6% disagree. This is a stark contrast to conventional wisdom that reporting is more detrimental to reputation, potential fines and litigation than holding off. The finding suggests that boards are now much more willing to work together with regulators. Boards in Brazil (92%), the U.K. (90%) and the U.S. (86%) feel this most keenly. Agreement is at its lowest in Australia (50%). Board members at organizations in the media/leisure (88%), Almost 9 in 10 (88%) respondents whose organization is IT/tech/telecom (87%) and manufacturing (85%) sectors privately owned agree with reporting requirements compared were most supportive of a reporting requirement. The least with more than 7 in 10 (71%) whose organization is publicly supportive are energy/oil/gas/utilities (58%). owned. “Board Directors have not only realized the importance of cyber risk, but are spending more time with their CISOs recognizing the risk posture and more importantly, understanding the incident response plan.” Julie Cullivan, Board Director 10 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Section 2: Cybersecurity posture and the boardroom Despite a level of misplaced confidence, board members are at least aware of the risks posed by cyber threats. Most also understand the pivotal role that their people play in these threats achieving success. Many also appear to recognize the systemic impact of cyber (third party risk, supply chain and people), with 75% agreeing they have such an understanding. But while it is tempting to take this finding at face value, there is likely more here than meets the eye. Board members may indeed understand systemic risk in that they know what it entails. But their views on the impact of cyber threats on their organizations suggest they don’t fully appreciate its consequences. Systemic risk has the potential to cause such widespread damage that private information becoming public and reputational impact would likely be the least of the board’s concerns. Should an attack happen, getting the organization back into operation quickly and effectively would likely take precedence. Brazil (88%), Spain (88%) and the U.K. (84%) are most Canada (56%) and Australia (54%) are the least confident. confident in their boards’ understanding of systemic risk. We found a similar level of confidence in budget levels. A clear majority (76%) of board members feel that their organization has made adequate investments in cybersecurity. The interesting follow up for this question is how the respondents define “adequate investments.” Board members likely feel that their organization’s investment is adequate because they have not experienced a cyber incident. Any cyber defense is good enough—until the moment it isn’t. The conventional approach is to invest in multiple layers of protection under the misguided assumption that the more layers of protection in place, the better. “Adequate investment” could imply that protections are in place, but that detection, recovery and response may still be lacking. Or it could mean that organizations have invested in technologies but fall short in organizational protections such as training and awareness. Regardless, a continued feeling of adequate investment will require increasing investment over time to ensure new vulnerabilities and threats are properly managed, and resilience continues to be a high priority. lizarB .K.U napaJ niapS ynamreG eropagniS ecnarF ailartsuA .S.U ylatI ocixeM adanaC Percentage of board members who agree that their organization has adequately invested in cybersecurity. 92% 84% 82% 82% Global 76% 78% 78% 72% 72% 70% 70% 70% 64% 11 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Board members feel strongly that their companies have adequately prepared employees in ways that increase cybersecurity. Just over three-quarters (76%) of board members reported that they believe employees understand their role in protecting their organization against cyber threats. This is surprisingly high, given much evidence to the contrary. Our research has repeatedly found that most users do not know what is expected of them in a breach. And only 57% of organizations run company-wide security awareness training programs3. Board members in Brazil (92%), the U.K. (82%) and Germany (80%) are most in agreement that employees understand their role in protecting the organization against cyber threats. Keeping cybersecurity on the agenda Privately owned When pitted against rapidly evolving and increasingly sophisticated threats, companies are more cybersecurity is never simple. Protections must be adapted to the threats of the day, and the organization must continually educate, motivate and reward their likely (82%) than publicly people for their role in keeping things secure. owned companies (70%) to discuss cybersecurity The good news is most board members reported keeping the issue of cyber matters at least once a defense regularly on the agenda. Of those surveyed, 76% said they discuss month. security matters at least once a month. This is encouraging. But given the daily barrage of threats facing most organizations, it may not be enough. The greater concern is the 24% of businesses failing to discuss this important topic on a regular basis. When a board takes notice and makes cybersecurity a priority, there is a trickle-down effect throughout your organization. Every level of the organization begins to make security a priority, and that builds and strengthens a culture of cybersecurity. A stronger culture builds a hardier defense against cyber threats. Privately owned companies are more likely (82%) than publicly How often does your board discuss cybersecurity matters? owned companies (70%) to discuss cybersecurity matters at least once a month. Other Similarly, most (77%) board members believe cybersecurity is a Once every 3 to 5 months top priority for their board. While the voice of cybersecurity has 4% Once a month been growing louder in the boardroom for some time now, this 8% figure is auspiciously high. The frequent cybersecurity events of Once every two 25% months the past few years, especially the large number that have made 13% headlines, have put pressure on executives and dramatically highlighted cybersecurity’s critical role in protecting organizations and keeping them operating. It is encouraging to see this urgency being reflected at the board level. 13% 21% Every board Board members in Spain (88%), Brazil (84%) and the meeting 16% Once every 2 to 3 U.K. (84%) reported the highest level of agreement that weeks cybersecurity is a top priority. At the other end of the scale, just 58% of Australia’s board members agreed with this statement. Once a week The overall percentage tracks with the finding that nearly three-quarters of survey respondents sit on boards where at 76% discuss security matters at least once a month least one member has cybersecurity expertise. Organizations (including 1% more often than once a week) that prioritize cybersecurity are also likely to support that commitment with cybersecurity expertise in the boardroom. 3 Proofpoint. “2022 State of the Phish Report.” February 2022. 12 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE niapS lizarB .K.U ocixeM .S.U ynamreG napaJ ylatI eropagniS ecnarF adanaC ailartsuA Percentage of board members who agree that cybersecurity is a priority for their board 88% 84% 84% 82% 80% 80% Global 77% 78% 76% 72% 70% 66% 58% Boards in Brazil (90%), the U.K. (84%) The U.S. and Canada are least likely Globally, 73% of boards have at and Germany (82%) are the most to have at least one board member least one member with cybersecurity likely to have at least one member with cybersecurity experience. Both experience. with cybersecurity experience. were reported at 62%. In further good news, almost three-quarters of boards have received some form of training on how to respond to a cyber incident. Still, it bears repeating that this is of little use if that training is not carried out on a regular basis. Security best practice is like muscle memory. It must be forged over time through repetition so that it can be reliably called upon when required. The more it is exercised, the stronger the muscle. Spotlight on: Budget A considerable majority (87%) of board members Board members in the expect their cybersecurity budget to increase over the 96% Manufacturing manufacturing (96%), IT/ next 12 months, while just 5% expect a decrease. The tech/telecoms (92%) and U.S. (98%), Germany (96%), Spain (94%) and Brazil business/professional (91%) (94%) have the highest levels of expectation, while it is sectors are most likely to at its lowest in Australia (66%), where 22% also expect expect an increase in their 92% IT/tech/telecoms budgets to go down. cybersecurity budgets. Because most respondents feel their organizations Public sector and energy/ have adequately invested in cybersecurity, this finding oil/gas/utilities (73%) are the suggests that board members know that they cannot 91% Business/ least expectant. sit still. The threat landscape is constantly evolving and professional cyber defenses must follow suit. 13 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Section 3: Examining the CISO’s relationship with the boardroom With cybersecurity now front-page news, the role of the CISO has taken on greater prominence in most organizations. Ninety percent of board members responded 100% of respondents in that they have a CISO in their organization. Where once boards perceived Mexico said their company their CISO to have limited remit—defend against cyberattacks—the role is now has a CISO, followed by rightfully regarded by many as more of an enabler to uninterrupted mission- 98% in Brazil, the U.S., critical operations. That recognition, in turn, has elevated this role from security Singapore and Spain. infrastructure overseer to business partner. The lowest level of CISO More surprising, however, is that 10% of businesses of size do not have a dedicated representation on the board CISO overseeing cyber strategy. The respondents in this study were all from is in Australia (70%). organizations with more than 5,000 employees—every one of them should have a cybersecurity leader. Board-CISO relations Interaction between CISOs and their board appears to be an area for attention and improvement. Just half of board members regularly interact with their CISO; around Regular CISO interaction with the a third say they see the CISO only when the latter is presenting to the board. While board is highest in Italy (67%), Germany (59%) and the U.K. (55%). 73% say these presentations occur regularly, this may not be enough. Bringing the It is lowest in Mexico (26%). CISO into the boardroom on a regular basis, and not just for presentations, shows that cybersecurity is a priority of the board. As addressed earlier in this report, board priorities have a trickledown effect on the entire organization. Board members can show their commitment to keeping the organization secure with greater interaction with their CISOs. Board meeting reports and presentations are just the beginning. Ask questions of your CISO. Follow up on headlines or news reports of breaches in other organizations with questions about how that type of breach might happen in your organization. Find other ways to personally support the CISO and the mission. These efforts will increase the likelihood that the rest of the organization makes cybersecurity a day-to-day priority. Board members and CISOs do not always see things the same way. While over two-thirds (69%) of board members say that they see eye-to-eye with their CISOs, just 51% of CISOs feel the same way. Underpinning this disconnect could be the finding that only 67% of board members believe they understand cybersecurity matters well enough to have an informed discussion with their CISO. Or it could be related to the unique focus of each role (as mentioned earlier in this report). Often, CISOs report on statistics about security protection that are too technical or not focused on the business metrics that matter most to board members. “A clear message stands out for CISOs. While their cyber technical expertise is highly valued, the board also greatly values the CISO’s ability to translate their technical aptitude into a risk management context and conversation.” Bob Zukis, Founder & CEO, Digital Directors Network 14 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Global 69% Global 51% Board members in Germany (89%), the U.K. (83%) and Spain (76%) see eye-to-eye with their CISOs the most. Relations are at their lowest in Brazil (57%). ynamreG .K.U niapS ylatI ocixeM .S.U ecnarF ailartsuA napaJ adanaC eropagniS lizarB Percentage of board members and CISOs who agree that they see eye-to-eye with each other 89% 85% 83% 76% 74% 74% N/A* 69% 67% 65% 64% 63% 58% 61% 60% 59% 57% N/A* 52% 50% 48% 44% 40% 34% Board CISO *Brazil and Mexico were not surveyed in the 2022 Voice of the CISO report. Both board members and CISOs can help close this gap. Boards must take steps to keep cybersecurity on the agenda. The CISO, meanwhile, must deliver concerns and recommendations in a business-first-manner. For example, board members are less interested in threat detection metrics than in how threat detection can affect revenues and reduce business risk. CISOs should avoid jargon and overly technical language and instead speak the language of the board and the business. Then they will be seen as business partners who understand the broader impact of their work and respected colleagues of their executive peers. “The board and CISO relationship is entering a new phase and has never been more important. The rapidly evolving cyber risk environment and proposed regulations are transforming boardroom cybersecurity expertise. As a result, the role of the CISO is evolving away from technical specialist to business executive who can understand where business value is coming from and articulate to the board how to protect it.” Betsy Wille, Director, The Cybersecurity Studio (former Abbott CISO) 15 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE What do boards expect of their CISO? The traits most desired of the CISO by their boards differ depending on location and industry. But in general, board members reported that they most value cybersecurity experience (49%), technical expertise (44%) and risk management (38%). These findings suggest a heavy focus on protection over resilience. Technical expertise is, of course, an essential requirement when making technology purchasing decisions. But when it comes to keeping an organization operational in the face of a cyber attack, CISOs also require a broader understanding of business management. Elevating board member expectations of the CISO will help build more meaningful, business-focused relationships. 5 out of 12 countries consider cybersecurity experience to 5 out of 12 surveyed countries consider technical expertise be the most valuable skill in a CISO, with the U.S. (64%) and to be the most valuable skill in a CISO, with Spain (56%) and Brazil (62%) leading the way. the U.K. (54%) rating it the highest. Communication skills are seen as most valuable for CISOs in Cybersecurity experience is the most desired CISO skill for Japan and Australia. board members at organizations across IT/tech/telecom, education, financial services, manufacturing, media/leisure, business/professional and transport. 16 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Conclusion: Actionable Insights for Board Members Only two-thirds of board members believe their organization is at risk of a material cyber attack, and even less than that believe the risk is very likely. Board members in most countries had markedly different perceptions of cyber risk than their CISOs, indicating a large opportunity for discussion between these two very important players in an organization’s cybersecurity leadership. These conversations must take place regularly and in the language of business, rather than the tech jargon of security. Board members’ top concerns around the source and impact of cyber attacks indicate an understanding of the high risk that human error plays in creating vulnerabilities for their organization. The CISO and other operational leaders have the ultimate responsibility to put programs and culture in place to drive the behaviors of their employees. But board members have two roles to play here, too. One is as a member of the organization—board members must personally adhere to the organization’s protocols around minimizing human risk. But the second is as a role model. The more the board makes cybersecurity a priority, the more other leaders will do the same. That trickles down throughout the organization. See it as an opportunity to supercharge the cybersecurity culture and change the dialogue from something the security team must do to something everyone must do. Every single person plays a part in keeping the organization secure. Board members also can improve their organization’s defensive posture by keeping cybersecurity front and center on their agenda. They can help their CISOs become business partners instead of security infrastructure overseers. Here are just a few key ways the board can help improve their organization’s security strategy for both protection and resilience: • Elevate cybersecurity to an agenda item every time the board meets. Placing this on the board agenda will keep it a high priority item with needed regular visibility. • Create a customized board dashboard of relevant metrics to show areas of success and areas in need of improvement. The ability to regularly view important business and cyber metrics will help board members understand the trends their organization experiences as well as see progress from cyber investments over time. • Build cybersecurity muscle so everyone knows how to protect from and respond to an incident. Board members want to understand their role in the event of an incident, and conducting regular table top exercises will teach them how to respond. • Regularly interact with cybersecurity leadership to build stronger relationships between the board and cyber leaders. The more familiar they become, the more likely they will begin to see eye-to-eye and align their priorities around the most important cybersecurity decisions. After all, keeping the lights on is everyone’s priority and board members just want to ensure that cybersecurity risk is properly managed so their organization is resilient to any attacks that come their way. “Making security a high priority helps drive the conversation forward—but those conversations will have limited success if the board members and their CISOs don’t speak the same language or share the same goals. A better alignment of the two sides around priorities will go a long way in improving their organizations’ protection and resilience. Boards must find opportunities to forge strategic partnerships with their CISOs to work collaboratively toward their common goals of minimizing their organizations’ risks and increasing their organizations’ cyber resiliency.” Dr. Keri Pearlson, Executive Director, Cybersecurity at MIT Sloan (CAMS) 17 CYBERSECURITY: THE 2022 BOARD PERSPECTIVE Methodology The Proofpoint Cybersecurity: The 2022 Board Perspective Within which primary sector is your organization? survey was conducted by research firm Censuswide between August 11 and August 22, 2022. It surveyed 600 board directors from organizations of 5,000 employees or Transport more across different industries in 12 countries. 50 board Education Other Energy, oil/gas, directors were interviewed in each market, which included and utilities IT, technology, 4%2%2% and telecoms the U.S., Canada, U.K., France, Germany, Italy, Spain, 4% 26% Australia, Singapore, Japan, Brazil and Mexico. 3,941 Public sector 6% board directors were invited to participate in the survey, Business and professional 6% resulting in a response rate of 15%. The data was analyzed services by the Proofpoint resident CISO team. The data was also 7% reviewed and this report coauthored by researchers from the Media, leisure, Cybersecurity at MIT Sloan (CAMS) research consortium. enter a ta n i d nment 7% 16% The results, insights and implications are the opinion of the Healthcare 8% Manufacturing 13% and production authors based on the data analysis. Retail Censuswide complies with the MRS Code of Conduct and Financial services ESOMAR principles. .K.U adanaC ecnarF ynamreG ylatI niapS eropagniS napaJ lizarB ocixeM ASU ailartsuA Is your organization publicly or privately owned? 84% 74% 66% 66% 66% 64% 64% 62% 60% 58% 56% 50% 50% 44% 42% 40% 38% 36% 36% 34% 34% 34% 26% 16% Publicly owned Privately owned LEARN MORE For more information, visit proofpoint.com. ABOUT PROOFPOINT Proofpoint, Inc. is a leading cybersecurity and compliance company that protects organizations’ greatest assets and biggest risks: their people. With an integrated suite of cloud-based solutions, Proofpoint helps companies around the world stop targeted threats, safeguard their data, and make their users more resilient against cyber attacks. Leading organizations of all sizes, including 75 percent of the Fortune 100, rely on Proofpoint for people-centric security and compliance solutions that mitigate their most critical risks across email, the cloud, social media, and the web. More information is available at www.proofpoint.com. ©Proofpoint, Inc. Proofpoint is a trademark of Proofpoint, Inc. in the United States and other countries. All other trademarks contained herein are property of their respective owners. Proofpoint.com 0401-003-01-01 09/22