The Total Economic Impact™ Of Exabeam Fusion SIEM Cost Savings And Business Benefits Enabled By Exabeam Fusion APRIL 2022 A FORRESTER TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ STUDY COMMISSIONED BY EXABEAM Table Of Contents Consulting Team: Amy Harrison Executive Summary ................................................. 1 The Exabeam Fusion SIEM Customer Journey .... 6 Key Challenges ...................................................... 6 Solution Requirements/Investment Objectives ...... 7 Composite Organization ......................................... 8 Analysis Of Benefits ................................................ 9 Security Team Efficiency Gains ............................. 9 Decreased Financial Exposure Due To Reduced Dwell Time ............................................ 12 Savings On Third-Party Incident Response Services ................................................................ 14 Cost Savings From Transition To The Cloud ....... 15 Unquantified Benefits ........................................... 17 Flexibility ............................................................... 18 Analysis Of Costs .................................................. 20 Annual Fees Paid To Exabeam ........................... 20 Implementation And Training ............................... 21 Financial Summary ................................................ 23 Appendix A: Total Economic Impact ................... 24 Appendix B: Endnotes .......................................... 25 ABOUT FORRESTER CONSULTING Forrester Consulting provides independent and objective research-based consulting to help leaders succeed in their organizations. For more information, visit forrester.com/consulting. © Forrester Research, Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized reproduction is strictly prohibited. Information is based on the best available resources. Opinions reflect judgment at the time and are subject to change. Forrester®, Technographics®, Forrester Wave, RoleView, TechRadar, and Total Economic Impact are trademarks of Forrester Research, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM Executive Summary Security teams used to have defined borders to protect, with limited user numbers and well-known threats like malware and lost or stolen laptops. As businesses evolve to embrace hybrid work policies or new technologies, the potential attack surface dramatically expands. Security professionals must defend their firm from the ever- changing attack surface with the movement of employees, customers, partners, and suppliers.1 With the average security operations center (SOC) today managing nearly 20 security point products, KEY STATISTICS analyst execution and team effectiveness has dropped off.2 Despite using industry-leading tools and having complex security controls in place, organizations continue to be breached predominantly due to an inability to detect when attacks come from inside the organization or an attacker masquerades Return on investment (ROI) Net present value (NPV) as a trusted insider. Exabeam delivers next- 245% $2.65M generation security incident and event management (SIEM) and extended detection and response (XDR) that enables organizations to modernize their SOC inconsistent with either no previous SIEM or a legacy and eliminate their blind spots with state-of-the-art provider that was not meeting the needs of their firm. user and entity behavior analysis (UEBA)-driven Their legacy solutions lacked integrated workflow or threat detection, investigation, and response. workforce management functionality, causing Exabeam commissioned Forrester Consulting to interviewees to work inefficiently without centralized conduct a Total Economic Impact™ (TEI) study and visibility. In addition, interviewees reported that examine the potential return on investment (ROI) security audits surfaced that these legacy SIEMs enterprises may realize by deploying Fusion SIEM.3 were not providing adequate visibility and detection, The purpose of this study is to provide readers with a which drove their executives to fund additional framework to evaluate the potential financial impact security infrastructure. of Fusion SIEM on their organizations. Interviewees were experienced in managing storage, To better understand the benefits, costs, and risks network, and related technology infrastructure and associated with this investment, Forrester interviewed were familiar with the challenges of assembling and six decision-makers with experience using Fusion maintaining an on-premises SIEM. SIEM. For the purposes of this study, Forrester Whether interviewees were replacing an existing aggregated the interviewees’ experiences and SIEM or deploying one for the first time, they were combined the results into a single composite looking for time-to-value. The regional CISO for a organization. holding company explained, “When you don’t have Prior to using Fusion SIEM, these interviewees noted developers to work with, you need a simple way to how the security maturity of their organizations was bring in the data feeds. Exabeam has their Cloud THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Connector, and by giving it the right credentials, it will • Cost savings from transition to the cloud. make the API calls and pull the information for you, Interviewees’ on-premises solutions suffered and then you’re off to the races. The time-to-value is from storage capacity and compute limitations, really affected by how fast you integrate those logs which are minimized in the cloud. Interviewees versus spending three months trying to write 12 selected a SaaS provider because they wanted different API calls so you can get everything going.” to follow their organizations’ cloud-first philosophies. For others, it was about the KEY FINDINGS reduced cost of system management and Quantified benefits. Risk-adjusted present value reduced downtime. (PV) quantified benefits include: Unquantified benefits. Benefits that are not • Security team efficiency gains. After deploying quantified for this study include: Exabeam, SOC teams gained a centralized view of their ecosystem that allowed them to quickly • Reduced service-level agreement (SLA) to the review and investigate security logs, alerts, and business. Leveraging Exabeam gave the IT incidents. This reduced false positives and security chief at a retail and manufacturing firm shortened mean time-to-respond and -resolve. the confidence to guarantee shorter response The CISO of the mining firm reported seeing a times, allowing him to cut his SLA to the business more than 70% drop in the number of incidents in half. their team needed to investigate, allowing them • Improved infrastructure team operations. The more time for threat hunting. Additionally, the CISO of the chemicals firm discussed how the CISO of the chemicals firm discussed how they infrastructure team uses Exabeam to provide could provide more security coverage with less- value to their department. They used it daily to experienced staff. understand what might block traffic to their • Decreased financial exposure due to reduced network applications. dwell time. Interviewees’ firms previously • Increased management-level visibility. The experienced financial losses due to internal and CISO of the chemicals firm uses the metrics external attacks. By deploying Exabeam, they captured in Exabeam to stay ahead of significant were able to recognize and respond to threats in changes he sees in his company’s ecosystem. a matter of minutes, where previously it could For example, the team tracks the number of have taken hours — if they were able to detect vulnerabilities per site to understand their current the threat at all. security posture. • Savings on third-party incident response • Eased staffing challenges. The interviewees services. The electronics firm CISO had used unanimously reported that they could operate cybersecurity incident response services (CIRS) more effectively with less-skilled employees. providers for digital forensics expertise when They worried less about employee churn and previously hit by a cybersecurity attack. Exabeam more about recruiting people with the right helped them avoid spending money with these aptitude for the job. As a result, they could fill firms by allowing them to easily pull records to positions faster, with a shorter ramp time. help in their legal defense preparation. The CISO Costs. Risk-adjusted PV costs include: reported saving more than $100,000 for just the investigation component for one event. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 2 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY • The composite organization paid a total of $250,000 in annual fees to Exabeam. An additional 15% of total net costs are paid to Exabeam to cover the Premier Success Plan. • The composite paid $75,000 in initial implementation fees. The interviewed decision- makers told Forrester that implementation costs were both internal and external in nature, with fees paid to Exabeam and a few weeks of internal effort contributing to overall costs. Over the course of the investment, additional internal effort for training and ongoing platform maintenance cost just under $147,000. The interviews and financial analysis found that a composite organization experiences benefits of $3.73M million over three years versus costs of $1.08M million, adding up to a net present value (NPV) of $2.65M million and an ROI of 245%. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 3 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ROI BENEFITS PV NPV PAYBACK 245% $3.73M $2.65M <6 months Benefits (Three-Year) Security team efficiency gains $572.5K Decreased financial exposure due $2.5M to reduced dwell time Savings on third -party incident response services $378.0K Cost savings from transition to the $326.3K cloud “When evaluating tools, my first two questions are, ‘Does your tool align to the N IST [National Institute of Standards and Technology] framework? Does it integrate Cost savings from transition to the with Ecloudxabeam$3?26.3’K Exabeam became the Cost savings from transition to the $326.3K cloud foundation of our entire security p rogram.” —THE T OTCAL EICSONOOMIC, IM PmACTi™n OFi nEXAgBE AM FUSION SIEM 4 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY TEI FRAMEWORK AND METHODOLOGY DUE DILIGENCE From the information provided in the interviews, Interviewed Exabeam stakeholders and Forrester constructed a Total Economic Impact™ Forrester analysts to gather data relative to the framework for those organizations considering an Fusion SIEM. investment in Exabeam Fusion SIEM. The objective of the framework is to identify the cost, DECISION-MAKER INTERVIEWS benefit, flexibility, and risk factors that affect the Interviewed six decision-makers at organizations investment decision. Forrester took a multistep using Exabeam Fusion SIEM to obtain data with approach to evaluate the impact that Fusion SIEM respect to costs, benefits, and risks. can have on an organization. COMPOSITE ORGANIZATION Designed a composite organization based on characteristics of the interviewees’ organizations. FINANCIAL MODEL FRAMEWORK Constructed a financial model representative of the interviews using the TEI methodology and risk-adjusted the financial model based on DISCLOSURES issues and concerns of the decision-makers. Readers should be aware of the following: This study is commissioned by Exabeam and delivered by Forrester Consulting. It is not meant to be used as a CASE STUDY competitive analysis. Employed four fundamental elements of TEI in Forrester makes no assumptions as to the potential ROI modeling the investment impact: benefits, costs, that other organizations will receive. Forrester strongly flexibility, and risks. Given the increasing advises that readers use their own estimates within the sophistication of ROI analyses related to IT framework provided in the study to determine the appropriateness of an investment in Exabeam Fusion investments, Forrester’s TEI methodology SIEM. provides a complete picture of the total Exabeam reviewed and provided feedback to Forrester, economic impact of purchase decisions. Please but Forrester maintains editorial control over the study see Appendix A for additional information on the and its findings and does not accept changes to the study that contradict Forrester’s findings or obscure the TEI methodology. meaning of the study. Exabeam provided the customer names for the interviews but did not participate in the interviews. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 5 The Exabeam Fusion SIEM Customer Journey Drivers leading to the Fusion SIEM investment Interviewed Decision-Makers Interviewee Industry Region Total Employees Chief information security officer Mining Global 4,900 Chief information security officer Chemicals Global 14,000 IT security chief Retail and manufacturing Global 230,000 Regional chief information security officer Holding company Global 40,000 Chief information security officer Electronics Global 6,500 Head of global operations Financial services Global 40,000 distributed via email caused duplication of work KEY CHALLENGES because analysts had no way of tracking who Forrester interviewed six representatives from responded to each alert. They explained: “Our organizations with experience using Exabeam Fusion previous solution just sent lots of alerts and SIEM. The interviewees described varying states of emails. I had no visibility into my team’s security maturity ranging from manual processing of processing of these events. An email alert came logs with no SIEM to more mature companies that in, and sometimes two or three agents were all had a legacy SIEM or leveraged managed security working the same one. With COVID and people service providers. being remote, there was less in-office The regional CISO for a holding company said that collaboration. We were operating in an ineffective until he deployed Exabeam, “security” meant mainly state, and I needed to fix that right away.” stopping website fraud or theft. He elaborated: “We • Security was expanding beyond the wanted proper security in the corporate IT space. perimeter. The regional CISO for a holding Security involved loading a bunch of software, then company described how on-premises security set it and forget it. That was security. We were not evolved into global security. The CISO noted, looking for internal threats or any lateral movement.” “Early security efforts were based on protecting Other interviewees previously deployed a SIEM, but it the ‘perimeter’ with firewalls, but there weren’t was not meeting the needs of their organizations. devices or controls responsible for guarding the The interviewees noted how their organizations network across all business units.” They realized struggled with common challenges, including: the need for more coverage and deployed intrusion detection systems (IDS) and intrusion • Legacy solutions lacked integrated workflow prevention systems (IPS). Their legacy solution or workforce management functionality. didn’t provide enough protection. The IT security Interviewees struggled without centralized chief continued: “We conducted two external visibility into their ecosystems. The CISO at the audits: one cybersecurity maturity audit and one electronics firm described how security alerts THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 6 THE EXABEAM FUSION SIEM CUSTOMER JOURNEY that was more of a compromise assessment. We easy. From a Fusion perspective, it was so much were lacking a lot of visibility and detection shorter than a traditional infrastructure build.” capabilities, which substantiated what I had been • Integrate security data into a single pane of telling the business about our exposure.” glass. The CISO of the chemicals company sought to increase and centralize security monitoring without increasing staffing. They “The majority of our log collection explained: “We’re looking at everything on one alerting was primarily around screen rather than having to pull up your firewall compliance and audit. It was not logs and your endpoint logs from different systems with different views. It’s hard to do, and about security. To be perfectly Exabeam Fusion can do that. The other benefit honest, we came from a very was reduced staff requirements because we now immature position where anything have centralized logging, a single pane of glass could’ve happened.” for monitoring, and the alerting is very good.” Head of global operations, financial services “Many companies have significant security deficiencies, and it’s overwhelming to face Building an on-premises SIEM was a long, them. You must get good control expensive process. Several interviewees had extensive experience managing storage, network, of your infrastructure to get and related technology infrastructure and were control of your security. This intimately familiar with the challenges of assembling allows you to work in parallel by and maintaining it. Those who attempted to build an getting up and running do some in-house SIEM experienced challenges like an basics with the stuff you have inability to scale. without having to fix your entire SOLUTION REQUIREMENTS/INVESTMENT data storage infrastructure.” OBJECTIVES Head of global operations, financial The interviewees’ organizations searched for a solution that could: service • Deliver best-in-class security logging with ease and speed. The head of global operations at the financial services firm was looking for a • Provide anomalous detection of user solution that would help them quickly meet behavior. The CISO of the electronics firm said: regulatory requirements: “I didn’t have to rely on “We ended up choosing Exabeam primarily for a third-party vendor that was managing my the UEBA capability. We were really looking to servers, network rules, or storage. We signed the operate more efficiently and do more with less contracts, I installed some site collectors, and in resources, and we felt that Exabeam was going a couple of days, we had logs. I mean, it was that to give us the best coverage of behavior-based analysis.” The CISO of the chemicals company THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 7 THE EXABEAM FUSION SIEM CUSTOMER JOURNEY concurred: “It’s not just logging. It’s behaviors Deployment characteristics. The composite and what people do. Are people logging in from organization has a centralized security operations different places where they shouldn’t be logging center and monitors all corporate technology across in from — another country for instance.” all endpoints. The company outsources their level 1 SOC operations and employs eight security team members. There is one VP, two senior-level analysts, four junior-level analysts, and one intern. The “One thing that helped composite uses SaaS-based providers for its demonstrate value was the business applications but does maintain some on- SolarWinds breach. We had to premises infrastructure. The firm chooses to deploy Exabeam in the cloud to quickly integrate its log handle it as though we were sources without having to completely upgrade its compromised and dig through data infrastructure. Finally, decision-makers at the logs, look for indicators of composite organization choose Exabeam to maintain compromise, and then compliance with industry regulations. document all that. At that time, our data retention was short. The board decided to invest to Key assumptions increase our log retention. That • $10B+ in revenue was a key event that really • Multiple global shaped the industry.” locations CISO, electronics • Financial services • 20,000 employees • 8 security team COMPOSITE ORGANIZATION members Based on the six interviews, Forrester constructed a • Uses mostly cloud- TEI framework, a composite company, and an ROI based business apps analysis that illustrates the areas financially affected. • Manages an on- The composite organization is representative of the premises data center six decision-makers that Forrester interviewed and is used to present the aggregate financial analysis in the next section. The composite organization has the following characteristics: Description of composite. The multibillion-dollar financial services firm provides investment services to clients across the globe. The composite organization has a strong brand, global operations, and more than 20,000 employees who live and work remotely. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 8 Analysis Of Benefits Quantified benefit data as applied to the composite Total Benefits Ref. Benefit Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Total Present Value Atr Security team efficiency gains $230,230 $230,230 $230,230 $690,690 $572,548 Decreased financial exposure Btr $988,000 $988,000 $988,000 $2,964,000 $2,457,010 due to reduced dwell time Savings on third-party incident Ctr $152,000 $152,000 $152,000 $456,000 $378,002 response services Cost savings from transition to Dtr $131,220 $131,220 $131,220 $393,660 $326,325 the cloud Total benefits (risk-adjusted) $1,501,450 $1,501,450 $1,501,450 $4,504,350 $3,733,885 SLA from when we saw a critical alert until we SECURITY TEAM EFFICIENCY GAINS confirmed an incident or discarded it as a false Evidence and data. After deploying Exabeam, the positive. We reduced time spent analyzing by SOC could review and investigate security logs, hand, no more going individually to the different alerts, and incidents through a centralized single consoles for the network, web servers, and view. Not only does this reduce false positives but it antivirus, for example. Because of our use of also speeds mean time-to-respond and -resolve. Exabeam, we felt comfortable reducing our SLA The CISO at the electronics firm had to take from 90 to 45 minutes.” calculated risks before deploying Exabeam. They explained: “I had a philosophy that we should ingest Second, the IT security chief discussed the role the complete universe [of data sources]. But just one process automation played in developing greater of my SOC agents was getting about a thousand efficiency: “I’m a big believer in the MITRE incidents a day. There was no way we could process ATT&CK framework, and I asked my team to to that level. We had to unenroll services and focus map everything to it.4 We developed scripts to on just what we felt was truly critical for us to be able input information from Exabeam. We built to listen to and respond to.” Because of the heatmaps and created a specific detection and efficiencies Exabeam provides, the interviewees were coverage on four different use cases, alerts, and able to improve their coverage by ingesting additional threats. We used all the models Exabeam data sources and increase the number of incidents includes and asked them to map back to the they were able to investigate. ATT&CK framework for each technique. In the end, we took that information and created Interviewees provided excellent examples of how automatic scripts, which helped with threat their teams became more effective: hunting.” • The IT security chief at the retail and • The CISO of the mining firm said: “The analytic manufacturing firm described two ways his team engine takes log sources and correlates them could increase their mean time to detect. First, he together, assigns risk points for users and assets, said: “We work under SLAs. We had a 90-minute THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 9 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS and we investigate when they hit a score of over was being able to do those views in Exabeam to 90 points. After investigating those incidents, we monitor and alert the right people.” can do threat hunting inside the tool. We used to • The CISO of the mining firm said: “When we do see up to 100 incidents a day, but the longer we need to investigate something, Exabeam use Exabeam, we’ve seen dramatic drops of eliminates hours of scouring through logs down about 70% to 75%. I would attribute nearly all of to just a few minutes. If I see something that that decrease in the number of incidents to the looks like a lateral movement, I hit the timeline in fact that we have Exabeam running in our Exabeam and pull up log entries directly out of environment.” the Exabeam tool instead of writing correlation rules on a traditional SIEM or manually hunting through logs on your own. It’s saved us hours “We’re a global company. Even and hours and is one of the reasons we can get though we don’t have a huge away with only two security people in our number of employees, the company.” disparity of our networks is what • The IT security chief of the retail and makes our situation unique. We’ve manufacturing firm discussed how Exabeam noticed as we implemented our increased their time-to-value by including the core library of correlation rules: “If I had to do that risk and vulnerability strategy, manually, I would have to ask each security addressing the things the risk control vendor for their catalog for each of the analysis tool was calling out, our events they log. I would need to map the risk scores have gone down technique for each one of the controls; then, I dramatically in just a few months. would have to do the correlation myself. Along with that comes a decrease Exabeam already included the correlation rules in in the number of incidents that their latest modules. It would have been a considerable feat for us to do that automation we’re dealing with daily. There is a without the correlation that Exabeam included.” direct correlation there.” Modeling and assumptions. Based on customer CISO, mining interviews, Forrester estimates the following for the composite organization: • Before Exabeam Fusion SIEM, 2,600 security • The CISO of the chemicals firm discussed how incidents needed manual investigation and centralized monitoring allowed him to reduce the resolution. number of staff they needed: “There’s reduced • Due to a lack of resources, the composite staff requirements because of centralized organization only had resources to investigate monitoring, and the alerting is excellent. I can do 25% of the 2,600 incidents before deploying what I do with a couple of people, and once you Exabeam. get somebody up to speed, it’s easy to train them to run the reports. I have an analyst who was an • Before Fusion SIEM, it took 360 minutes to intern, and one of the first things we put him on investigate an incident. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 10 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS • After deploying Fusion SIEM, it took 5 minutes to Results. To account for these risks, Forrester investigate an incident. adjusted this benefit downward by 20%, yielding a three-year, risk-adjusted total PV (discounted at 10%) • It took a total of 234,000 minutes each year to of $573,000. investigate and resolve all incidents, before Exabeam. • After deploying Exabeam, the composite was “The value that Exabeam able to investigate 75% of the 2,600 incidents. brought was better initial triage • After deploying Exabeam, it only took 9,750 of those events that allowed us minutes to investigate 75% of the 2,600 to ignore less. I think I would say incidents. at least 50%, probably more. The • Based on an annual savings of 3,738 hours, the goal was to catch what was truly security team was able to save nearly $288,000. important. We now filter out Risks. Organizations may realize results that differ more of the low-level noise more from those presented in the financial model due to: effectively to identify the critical- level risks that need to be • The size and average salary of the SOC team. investigated.” • The number of incidents that the organization is handling. CISO, electronics • The average time SOC analysts spend on false positives and advanced investigations. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 11 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS Security Team Efficiency Gains Ref. Metric Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Annual number of security incidents that A1 Interview 2,600 2,600 2,600 need manual investigation and resolution Percent of incidents that were investigated A2 Interviews 25% 25% 25% before Exabeam Actual time to investigate and resolve an A3 Interviews 360 360 360 incidence before Exabeam(minutes) Actual time to investigate and resolve an A4 Interviews 5 5 5 incidence after Exabeam (minutes) Time (minutes) needed to investigate and A5 Interviews 234,000 234,000 234,000 resolve incidences, before Exabeam Percent of incidents that were actually A6 Interviews 75% 75% 75% investigated after Exabeam Time needed (in minutes) to investigate A7 Interviews 9,750 9,750 9,750 and resolve incidences after Exabeam A8 Annual time savings (hours) A5-A7/60 3,738 3,738 3,738 Security analyst hourly compensation, fully A9 TEI standard $77 $77 $77 burdened At Security team efficiency gains A8*A9 $287,788 $287,788 $287,788 Risk adjustment ↓20% Security team efficiency gains (risk- Atr $230,230 $230,230 $230,230 adjusted) Three-year total: $690,690 Three-year present value: $572,548 DECREASED FINANCIAL EXPOSURE DUE TO lacked the security infrastructure resources to REDUCED DWELL TIME recognize these threats before real value was stolen Evidence and data. Data theft requires access to the from their organizations. Two interviewees described data. That access is either obtained by external scenarios where millions of dollars of intellectual actors who, using compromised credentials, property theft occurred. The CISO of the mining firm masquerade as insiders, or granted to an insider as said: “We had an insider threat breach a couple of part of their job. Insiders can be any employee, years ago where intellectual property data was stolen contractor, partner, or vendor who has access to your by a citizen of another country. No GDPR data was firm’s data and systems. Today, most security teams compromised, but intellectual property was. The cost focus their security controls on external threats and to us could have been in the millions.” fail to treat the insider threat as a major threat vector. The CISO of the mining firm continued: “Prior to Understanding user behavior is key for finding [deploying Exabeam], you might identify that malicious insiders and compromised accounts. something doesn’t look quite right. You would go to Damage from threats comes in several forms: fraud, firewall and active directory logs as well as other intellectual property theft, sabotage and destruction, systems, combing through those for that person’s snooping, leaking, and doxing.5 name. You’re probably already four or five hours in, Interviewees were well aware of the risks that these without even starting any of the correlation work yet. internal and external threats cause; however, many Exabeam does that all for you with a few clicks get to THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 12 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS entire timeline of everything they’ve done throughout can see that the system is an executive, and it’s an that day just simply coming from the log files. It admin logging in. Admins have superior privileges, literally takes five [or] six hours’ worth of work down but it could look like a hacker that’s broken into the to a few minutes.” He went on to describe that he system and accessing an executive system. Because could quickly further his investigation, which allowed we can see those details, it helps you identify and fix him to contact the person to ask relevant questions: problems quicker.” “You start seeing those correlations and making The IT security chief at the retail and manufacturing those decisions in a rather rapid manner. You’ve firm experienced a scenario where there were attacks already seen all of that from the matter of just clicking against financial transactions. Prior to deploying on a popped-up alert inside of the tool that otherwise Exabeam, they didn’t have visibility into these transactions. This incident drove the need to expand their monitoring of user behavior to cover more “You can start asking relevant critical infrastructure. They said: “With Exabeam, I questions, calling a person to can do behavior. I can do some things that are very inquire why you saw them log in advanced compared to doing just static rules on a SIEM.” from Delhi, India, and then five minutes from Australia.” We all The IT security chief described how Exabeam know the answer to that is no. impacted their dwell time: “The last incident we handled, Exabeam and our other tools helped us cut That’s where you start seeing our dwell time. We went from days to minutes. In just correlations and making decisions minutes, we detected him but watched each of his in a rapid manner. You see that actions for 10 more minutes to confirm before kicking from just clicking on a popped-up him out of the server. Previously, it took us up to 48 alert inside of the tool that hours being inside the server before we noticed otherwise would have taken you something was happening because he had to try to five, six, seven, maybe even days’ do something outside of the server or move laterally or do something else in the kill chain. Now, we of time to figure out.” detected him as soon as he touched the server CISO, mining because we had good visibility in all those critical servers. Exabeam gives us that quick alert and quick possibility to do the incident response with the incident response module [and] to use the SOAR to would have taken you five, six, seven, maybe even do orchestration and automation on some of the eight [hours], maybe even days’ worth to figure out.” things we’re seeing.” The CISO of the chemicals company described their Modeling and assumptions. Based on customer risk-based approach to investigations: “You always interviews, Forrester estimates the following for the want to see all the movement in your security system. composite organization: You want to know when admins are logging into executive PCs. We track high-risk systems and have • Based on the losses described in the interviews, specific alerts set to track executives, because many the composite organization experienced losses of times they’re targeted. Most systems can see that $2 million each year. somebody logging into a system, but in Exabeam, we THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 13 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS • “Forrester Consulting Cost Of A Cybersecurity • The financial impact of each breach. Breach Survey, Q4 2020” revealed that 65% of • The ability of the security team to react to companies with between 20,000 and 50,000 Exabeam’s alerts. employees experienced a breach every year. Results. To account for these risks, Forrester • Interviewees were able to reduce their dwell time adjusted this benefit downward by 20%, yielding a by 95% — from months to minutes. three-year, risk-adjusted total PV of $2.5 million. Risks. Risks that may impact financial exposure due to reduced dwell time include: • The number of breaches the organization experiences each year. Decreased Financial Exposure Due To Reduced Dwell Time Ref. Metric Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 B1 Cost of Stolen IP Interview $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 Forrester custom B2 Probability of an incident occurring 65% 65% 65% research Decrease in vulnerability window from B3 interview 95% 95% 95% using Exabeam Decreased financial exposure due to Bt B1*B2*B3 $1,235,000 $1,235,000 $1,235,000 reduced dwell time Risk adjustment ↓20% Decreased financial exposure due to Btr $988,000 $988,000 $988,000 reduced dwell time (risk-adjusted) Three-year total: $2,964,000 Three-year present value: $2,457,010 SAVINGS ON THIRD-PARTY INCIDENT The electronics firm CISO explained: “We had been RESPONSE SERVICES down the path of forensics and evidence collection Evidence and data. Cybersecurity incident response and made a specific decision to contract with a service providers offer critical support during certified third-party to perform those collections for cybersecurity breaches. They provide incident us. The main reason that we wanted to do that was response and digital forensics expertise on demand we didn’t have any certified forensic experts on our to support customers hit by cybersecurity attacks team. If they were deposed, they are in a weaker such as data breaches, malware outbreaks, and position that wouldn’t be helpful to our case, so we ransomware infections that disrupt operations.6 outsource completely. Now, to collect defense data, we pull from Exabeam as one of the sources or The CISO at an electronics firm described how collection points. It costs hundreds of thousands of Exabeam not only helped them save money dollars to hire a third party, depending on the size of previously spent with cybersecurity incident response the collection and the amount of time. There was one services providers but also helped them feel event that was over $100,000 in just the investigation confident in their legal defense preparation. component, not even other legal aspects.” THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 14 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS Modeling and assumptions. Based on customer • The number of security incidents that require interviews, Forrester estimates that the composite forensic investigation. organization spends $200,000 on a yearly basis with • The size of the firm previously hired and the cybersecurity incident response services providers. scope of services they were contracted to Using Exabeam, the composite was able to reduce perform. their spend with third party providers by 95%. Results. To account for these risks, Forrester Risks. The savings on third-party services will vary adjusted this benefit downward by 20%, yielding a with: three-year, risk-adjusted total PV of $378,002. Savings On Third-Party Incident Response Services Ref. Metric Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Dollars previously spent on forensic C1 Composite $200,000 $200,000 $200,000 collection Decrease in vulnerability window from C2 interview 95% 95% 95% using Exabeam (From months to minutes) Savings on third-party incident response Ct C1*C2 $190,000 $190,000 $190,000 services Risk adjustment ↓20% Savings on third-party incident response Ctr $152,000 $152,000 $152,000 services (risk-adjusted) Three-year total: $456,000 Three-year present value: $378,002 COST SAVINGS FROM TRANSITION TO THE “The biggest thing I saw with on- CLOUD prem SIEMs is capacity Evidence and data. Legacy on-premises solutions management. To run a query suffered from storage capacity and compute against three years’ worth of limitations that are minimized in the cloud. Cloud- logs bogs down the system. hosted solutions are easier to manage and maintain When you get multiple queries than on-premises hardware or software, helping with scalability and offloading maintenance to the that are running against these provider.7 Interviewees had different reasons for infrastructure components, selecting a cloud-based provider. Still, all resulted in you’re hamstrung by their value for their companies. capabilities. Exabeam does a • For the CISO at the retail and manufacturing firm, better job of scaling that it was less about storage and more about the performance.” network. They explained: “In general, my Head of global operations, financial philosophy is cloud-first. If I were considering building an on-premises SIEM, I’m not sure it services would be on-premises. It would probably be in [a THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 15 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS cloud services provider] because traditional data Results. To account for these risks, Forrester centers are dying.” adjusted this benefit downward by 10%, yielding a three-year, risk-adjusted total PV of $326,000. • For the CISO at the chemicals firm, the advantage for moving their SIEM to the cloud was about the reduced cost of system management. He explained: “The cost savings “Software as a service has taken were that we didn’t have to handle our over the industry for the last 10 equipment; we didn’t have to patch the years. Why not security? equipment. We didn’t have to upgrade it and Especially considering the maintain it, which took a fourth of a person, so that’s a big cost saving.” In addition, he also economies of scale you get with described benefits from reduced downtime: “In data linking. Regulators require the past, we’d be down for a couple of days us to carry significant log data sometimes, and while the entire system wouldn’t for three years. To do that, be down, we might lose some functionality built you’ve got to buy servers, into the system. Now, because of redundancy expand storage, and then built into the cloud, it’s been three and a half maintain it all. I have the years we are hardly down. Cloud is the way to go.” alternative of giving this data to Exabeam to manage. I Modeling and assumptions. Based on customer understand the pitfalls of large interviews, Forrester estimates the following for the composite organization: data storage that goes away when you put that burden on • The organization shuts down its four on-premises Exabeam to manage it. The servers in the first year it implements Exabeam Fusion SIEM. caveat is they have to be good at it!” • The organization reassigns one IT FTE from server/network-related infrastructure Head of global operations, financial management to value-add projects. services Risks. Cost savings from the transition to the cloud may vary depending on the following: • The cost of the hardware previously used for the former on-premises security system(s). • The costs of software, maintenance, and facilities. • IT or security staff dedicated to security-related infrastructure management. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 16 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS Cost Savings From Transition To The Cloud Ref. Metric Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Servers avoided due to moving to the D1 Interviews 4 4 4 cloud D2 Server cost Industry average $5,000 $5,000 $5,000 D3 Network cost per server Industry average $750 $750 $750 Server/network hardware D4 Industry average $4,500 $4,500 $4,500 maintenance D5 Software costs Industry average $2,500 $2,500 $2,500 D6 Server software maintenance Industry average $1,500 $1,500 $1,500 Server/network power, cooling, and D7 Industry average $7,200 $7,200 $7,200 facilities D8 Infrastructure costs saved D1*(D2+D3+D4+D5+D6+D7) $85,800 $85,800 $85,800 Number of IT FTEs managing the D9 Interviews 1 1 1 infrastructure for on-premises solution Percent of IT FTE's time dedicated to D10 Assumption 50% 50% 50% server/network management D11 IT FTE fully burdened annual salary TEI standard $120,000 $120,000 $120,000 Subtotal: reduction in server/network D12 D9*D10*D11 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 admin costs Cost savings from transition to the Dt D8+D12 $145,800 $145,800 $145,800 cloud Risk adjustment ↓10% Cost savings from transition to the Dtr $131,220 $131,220 $131,220 cloud (risk-adjusted) Three-year total: $393,660 Three-year present value: $326,325 UNQUANTIFIED BENEFITS There are a lot of companies out there that have Additional benefits that customers experienced but significant security deficiencies, and it looks were not able to quantify include: extremely overwhelming to face them. You have to get a good control of your infrastructure for you • Reduced SLA to the business. Leveraging to get control of your security. It gives us Exabeam gave the IT security chief at the retail significant flexibility where we don’t have to rely and manufacturing firm the confidence to on any outside teams.” guarantee shorter response times to business partners. They said: “The investigation time to • Infrastructure team benefits. The CISO of the confirm an alert was greatly reduced. I was able chemicals firm discussed how the infrastructure to decrease my SLA from 90 to 45 minutes.” team uses Exabeam. “If someone is having trouble connecting, IT needs to see certain logs • Faster time-to-value. The regional CISO at a across networking devices or firewalls to holding company noted: “It allows time-to-market. understand why traffic is blocked. We have an THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 17 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS implementation of SaaS applications. If described how he would offer opportunities to somebody can’t get into those applications, we employees from IT, for example, who had the log those. They use it every day. They use it as characteristics required to be a solid security much as we do. It’s good information for performer: “I hired someone who had been in IT everybody.” for a long time and wanted to try something else. He had never done cybersecurity in his life, [but he] did things to help enable it, such as documenting better cybersecurity practices. We “Exabeam’s UEBA stack — and ramped that person up in three months, and his I’ve talked to all the product manager said, ‘He is the fastest ramp-up and the developers [at Exabeam] — is best hire I’ve ever had. A lot of that is the the best in the business. What person’s will, but it’s also having the right tools. they do for behavior analytics is It’s not just Exabeam, to be fair, but Exabeam is fantastic.” a great part of it.’” FLEXIBILITY CISO, retail and manufacturing The value of flexibility is unique to each customer. There are multiple scenarios in which a customer might implement Fusion SIEM and later realize • Management-level visibility. The CISO of the additional uses and business opportunities, including: chemicals firm uses the metrics captured in • Expanded visibility into integrated security Exabeam to stay ahead of important changes tools. The head of global operations at the they’re seeing in their ecosystem. The said: “As financial services firm said: “We just purchased a the CISO, I can see changes that are important threat intelligence platform that we’ve integrated to me. For example, I see that the number of in Exabeam. We’re starting to focus on the threat vulnerabilities has gone up in one location. It intel journey and the indicators of compromise gives me the ability to say, ‘What’s going on at (IOCs). The fact that Exabeam integrates with that location? We need to get out there and several threat intelligence products is super check things out,’ or ‘Are they missing patches?’ I important. I’m a firm believer in TIPs [threat don’t know if I can’t quantify that in terms of time intelligence platforms]. We use [another] threat and money, but it gives me and executive intelligence platform, and then I pull in the feeds management a view into our important metrics. I where I feel we need to get feeds from. I think don’t know that I can put a dollar value on it, but that’s a very reliable methodology for managing it’s definitely saving us money.” threats.” • Eased staffing challenges. The CISO of the • Improved tracking of metrics. Prior to electronics firm said, “We were able to operate Exabeam, all the interviewees struggled to effectively with the less-skilled resource.” The answer questions specifically related to metrics regional CISO of the holding company concurred: such as mean time-to-detect or mean time-to- “I am not afraid of a tier 1 person leaving the repair. One electronics industry CISO revealed company because the tools do the job for them how they will leverage Exabeam now to track and the ramp-up time for them to become these valuable metrics: “Because of the volume effective on the team is very fast. I don’t worry of incidents coming in, the team could only keep about a revolving door at the tier 1 level.” He THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 18 ANALYSIS OF BENEFITS up with processing them based on their significance to the business. That is something that we aspire to do here. We haven’t done that “Prior to having this tool and yet primarily because we didn’t have the tools to others, I wouldn’t even know do it. Security is one of those things that people where to start for IOCs. You get will share a little bit but never the whole picture.” so wrapped up in trying to Flexibility would also be quantified when evaluated as figure out where it came from, part of a specific project (described in more detail in but you’re not even thinking Appendix A). about tearing that piece of network apart and finding out what the indicators are compromised for and then threat-hunting the rest of your organization for those. If you don’t have a tool in place to do that, you might as well just not even try.” CISO, mining THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 19 Analysis Of Costs Quantified cost data as applied to the composite Total Costs Ref. Cost Initial Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Total Present Value Annual fees paid to Etr $0 $345,000 $345,000 $345,000 $1,035,000 $857,964 Exabeam Implementation and Ftr $98,640 $81,816 $32,256 $32,256 $244,968 $223,910 training Total costs (risk- $98,640 $426,816 $377,256 $377,256 $1,279,968 $1,081,874 adjusted) • Number of gigabytes ingested per day. ANNUAL FEES PAID TO EXABEAM Evidence and data. The interviewees’ organizations • Whether or not organizations opt for the cloud paid annual fees for the use of Exabeam Fusion archive add-on for Fusion SIEM. SIEM as well as an additional fee to use Exabeam’s • The number of seats covered for the Exabeam Premier Success Plan technical support. Fusion Enterprise edition Incident Responder Modeling and assumptions. For the composite add-on. organization, Forrester assumes: • Whether or not organizations opt for the • The composite organization pays a total of Exabeam Premier Success Plan. $250,000 in annual fees to Exabeam. Results. To account for these risks, Forrester • An additional 15% of total net fees is paid to adjusted this cost upward by 20%, yielding a three- Exabeam to cover the Premier Success Plan. year, risk-adjusted total PV (discounted at 10%) of $857,964. Risks. Costs may vary among organizations according to the following factors: Annual Fees Paid To Exabeam Ref. Metric Source Initial Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 E1 Fees paid to Exabeam Composite $250,000 $250,000 $250,000 E2 Premier Success Plan fees 15%*E1 $37,500 $37,500 $37,500 Et Annual fees paid to Exabeam E1+E2 $0 $287,500 $287,500 $287,500 Risk adjustment ↑20% Annual fees paid to Exabeam (risk- Etr $0 $345,000 $345,000 $345,000 adjusted) Three-year total: $1,035,000 Three-year present value: $857,964 THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 20 ANALYSIS OF COSTS IMPLEMENTATION AND TRAINING • Number and type of employees needed for Evidence and data. The interviewed decision- implementation. makers told Forrester that implementation costs were • Number and type of employees needed for both internal and external in nature, with fees paid to training. Exabeam and a few weeks of internal effort both contributing to overall costs. • Number and type of employees needed for ongoing maintenance. • The interviewees also told Forrester that they paid Exabeam an initial training fee. • Total amount of time to implement Exabeam and train employees. • Additional internal effort was required over the Results. To account for these risks, Forrester investment for both training and ongoing adjusted this cost upward by 20%, yielding a three- maintenance of the platform. year, risk-adjusted total PV of $233,910. “Exabeam does a very good job of holding your hand during implementation. They’re with you every step of the way.” CISO, mining Modeling and assumptions. For the composite organization, Forrester assumes: • An initial fee of $75,000 paid to Exabeam for implementation. • An additional fee of $24,500 paid to Exabeam for training in the first year of the investment. • Two analysts working at half-time for three weeks are required for implementation. • Eight security analyst team members undergo five days of training in Year 1, decreasing to one analyst in Years 2 and 3. • One analyst spends 20% of their time on maintenance. Risks. Costs may vary among organizations according to the following factors: • Size and type of fees paid to Exabeam. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 21 ANALYSIS OF COSTS Implementation And Training Ref. Metric Source Initial Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Implementation fees paid to F1 Exabeam $75,000 Exabeam Time spent on implementation F2 Composite 120 (hours) F3 Analysts needed for implementation Composite 2 Average analyst fully burdened F4 TEI standard $60 $60 $60 $60 hourly salary Analyst time needed for F5 Composite 50% implementation F6 Subtotal: implementation costs F1+(F2*F3*F4*F5) $82,200 F7 Fees paid to Exabeam for training Exabeam $24,500 F8 Security analysts Composite 8 1 1 F9 Security analyst training time (hours) Composite 40 40 40 F10 Subtotal: training cost F8*F9*F4 $19,200 $2,400 $2,400 Analysts needed for ongoing F11 Interviews 1 1 1 maintenance Percentage of analyst’s time for F12 Interviews 20% 20% 20% ongoing maintenance F13 Subtotal: ongoing maintenance cost (F4*2040)*F11*F12 $24,480 $24,480 $24,480 Ft Implementation and training F6+F10+F13 $82,200 $68,180 $26,880 $26,880 Risk adjustment ↑20% Implementation and training (risk- Ftr $98,640 $81,816 $32,256 $32,256 adjusted) Three-year total: $244,968 Three-year present value: $223,910 THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 22 Financial Summary CONSOLIDATED THREE-YEAR RISK-ADJUSTED METRICS Cash Flow Chart (Risk-Adjusted) The financial results calculated in the Total costs Total benefits Cumulative net benefits Benefits and Costs sections can be used to determine the ROI, NPV, and hs $3.5 M payback period for the composite sw ao organization’s investment. Forrester Clf $3.0 M assumes a yearly discount rate of 10% for this analysis. $2.5 M $2.0 M $1.5 M These risk-adjusted ROI, NPV, and payback period $1.0 M values are determined by applying risk-adjustment $0.5 M factors to the unadjusted results in each Benefit and Cost section. -$0.5 M -$1.0 M Initial Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Cash Flow Analysis (Risk-Adjusted Estimates) Present Initial Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Total Value Total costs ($98,640) ($426,816) ($377,256) ($377,256) ($1,279,968) ($1,081,874) Total benefits $0 $1,501,450 $1,501,450 $1,501,450 $4,504,350 $3,733,885 Net benefits ($98,640) $1,074,634 $1,124,194 $1,124,194 $3,224,382 $2,652,011 ROI 245% Payback period <6 (months) THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 23 Appendix A: Total Economic Impact PRESENT VALUE (PV) Total Economic Impact is a methodology developed by Forrester Research that enhances a company’s The present or current value of technology decision-making processes and assists (discounted) cost and benefit estimates vendors in communicating the value proposition of given at an interest rate (the discount their products and services to clients. The TEI rate). The PV of costs and benefits feed methodology helps companies demonstrate, justify, into the total NPV of cash flows. and realize the tangible value of IT initiatives to both senior management and other key business stakeholders. NET PRESENT VALUE (NPV) TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT APPROACH The present or current value of Benefits represent the value delivered to the (discounted) future net cash flows given business by the product. The TEI methodology an interest rate (the discount rate). A places equal weight on the measure of benefits and positive project NPV normally indicates the measure of costs, allowing for a full examination that the investment should be made, of the effect of the technology on the entire unless other projects have higher NPVs. organization. Costs consider all expenses necessary to deliver the RETURN ON INVESTMENT (ROI) proposed value, or benefits, of the product. The cost category within TEI captures incremental costs over A project’s expected return in the existing environment for ongoing costs percentage terms. ROI is calculated by associated with the solution. dividing net benefits (benefits less costs) by costs. Flexibility represents the strategic value that can be obtained for some future additional investment building on top of the initial investment already made. DISCOUNT RATE Having the ability to capture that benefit has a PV The interest rate used in cash flow that can be estimated. analysis to take into account the Risks measure the uncertainty of benefit and cost time value of money. Organizations estimates given: 1) the likelihood that estimates will typically use discount rates between meet original projections and 2) the likelihood that 8% and 16%. estimates will be tracked over time. TEI risk factors are based on “triangular distribution. PAYBACK PERIOD The initial investment column contains costs incurred at “time The breakeven point for an investment. 0” or at the beginning of Year 1 that are not discounted. All This is the point in time at which net other cash flows are discounted using the discount rate at the end of the year. PV calculations are calculated for each total benefits (benefits minus costs) equal cost and benefit estimate. NPV calculations in the summary initial investment or cost. tables are the sum of the initial investment and the discounted cash flows in each year. Sums and present value calculations of the Total Benefits, Total Costs, and Cash Flow tables may not exactly add up, as some rounding may occur. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION SIEM 24 Appendix B: Endnotes 1 Source: “Defend Your Digital Business From Advanced Cyberattacks Using Forrester’s Zero Trust Model,” Forrester Research, Inc., June 25, 2021. 2 Source: Charlie Osborne, “The more cybersecurity tools an enterprise deploys, the less effective their defense is,” ZDnet, June 30, 2020 (https://www.zdnet.com/article/the-more-cybersecurity-tools-an-enterprise-deploys-the-less- effective-their-defense-is/). 3 Total Economic Impact is a methodology developed by Forrester Research that enhances a company’s technology decision-making processes and assists vendors in communicating the value proposition of their products and services to clients. The TEI methodology helps companies demonstrate, justify, and realize the tangible value of IT initiatives to both senior management and other key business stakeholders. 4 MITRE ATT&CK is a globally accessible knowledge base of adversary tactics and techniques based on real-world observations. The ATT&CK knowledge base is used as a foundation for the development of specific threat models and methodologies in the private sector, in government, and in the cybersecurity product and service community. Source: The MITRE Corporation (https://attack.mitre.org/). 5 Source: “Best Practices: Mitigating Insider Threat,” Forrester Research, Inc., March 18, 2021. 6 Source: “Now Tech: Cybersecurity Incident Response Services, Q4 2021,” Forrester Research, Inc., December 2, 2021. 7 Source: “Adapt Or Die: XDR Is On A Collision Course With SIEM And SOAR,” Forrester Research, Inc., April 28, 2021. THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION 25 THE TOTAL ECONOMIC IMPACT™ OF EXABEAM FUSION 26