The State of Attack Surface Management 2022 TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 22 Table of Contents Executive Summary ..............................................................................................................03 Introduction ..........................................................................................................................05 Attack Surface Expansion Continues While Visibility Remains Poor .....................................07 Tomorrow’s Threats, Yesterday’s Technology ....................................................................... 11 External Attack Surface Management Is the Top Priority for 2022 ........................................14 Why Are Enterprises Starting with EASM? ............................................................................16 Conclusion ............................................................................................................................17 About Randori .......................................................................................................................18 RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 33 Randori recently partnered with ESG to gain a more Executive complete picture of the current state of Attack Surface Management. We surveyed 398 IT and security Summary decision-makers in the US and Canada, the better to have perspectives from real practitioners on how companies currently manage their attack surfaces, how they adapt their programs for evolving threats, and the biggest hurdles to effective attack surface management. A Few of Our Key Findings • 2 out of 3 organizations say their external attack ATTACK SURFACES surface has expanded in the past 12 months. CONTINUE TO EXPAND, BUT VISIBILITY REMAINS POOR • 7 in 10 organizations have been compromised via an unknown, unmanaged, or poorly managed internet- facing asset in the past year. • It takes more than 80 hours for the TEAMS CAN’T KEEP PACE, average organization to update their attack EXISTING PROCESSES ARE surface inventory. SLOW & INEFFECTIVE • Nearly 3 out of 4 organizations still rely on spreadsheets to manage their attack surface. • Less than 1 in 3 organizations have a formal EXTERNAL ATTACK external attack surface management solution. SURFACE MANAGEMENT IS A TOP INVESTMENT • External attack surface management is the FOR 2022 number one investment priority for large enterprises in 2022. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 44 Our findings show that in order to resolve the attack surface management challenges facing organizations, IT and security teams need to invest in solutions that automate and centralize monitoring of internet-facing assets and provide greater insight into vulnerabilities. To stay ahead of attackers, organizations must be able to accurately monitor their attack surfaces, maintain fully updated asset inventories, and truly judge which vulnerabilities to patch for the greatest risk reduction. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 55 Introduction Having a clear view of which assets are The joint ESG/Randori research shows exposed and the risk they pose has long an industry fighting to keep pace with been recognized as foundational to an the rapid expansion of and constant effective security program (CIS 1, 2, and shifts in the digital landscape, but lacking 7). However, investigations into recent the tools and processes required to do data breaches have shown that despite so effectively. The result is a growing increased investment, enterprises gap between what’s truly exposed to continue to struggle with managing their attackers and the risks known to security attack surface effectively. teams. To uncover more about the issues Based on our research, there are holding security teams back and three forces driving growing demand understand the current state of for solutions that offer a more attack surface management, Randori continuous approach to attack surface partnered with ESG to survey 398 IT and management: security decision-makers on what their enterprises are doing today to provide a broad assessment on the current state of attack surface management. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM THE STATE OF ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 2022 6 ATTACK SURFACE EXPANSION CONTINUES WHILE VISIBILITY REMAINS POOR 67% 69% of organizations saw their external attack of organizations have been surface expand in the past two years. compromised via an unknown, The rising use of cloud solutions, SaaS unmanaged, or poorly managed internet- applications and services, third-party facing asset in the past year. This reality providers, and remote workers have all underscores the risk of shadow IT, and contributed to expansions in the the importance of building an accurate attack surface. picture of your attack surface. EXISTING PROCESSES ARE SLOW AND INEFFECTIVE 80+ 70% 3 4 hours Nearly in It takes more than two of organizations use organizations still rely on weeks for the average at least 10 solutions to spreadsheets to manage organization to get an manage their security their attack surface. updated view of their hygiene – a recipe attack surface. for data quality and management issues if ever there was one. EXTERNAL ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT IS A TOP INVESTMENT FOR 2022 1 3 #1 Less than in organizations have a formal external External attack surface management is attack surface management solution. the number one investment priority for large enterprises in 2022. RANDORI.COM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 77 This report looks into the data and dives deeper into each of these three forces and the factors behind them, as well as providing actionable recommendations. The goal of these findings is to inform you what others are doing to close the gap between what attackers see and what your team knows to protect. Attack Surface Expansion Continues While Visibility Remains Poor 7 in 10 Organizations Have Been Compromised By Shadow IT Over the past two years, the known attack On its face, larger attack surfaces are not a surface – the sum of all internet-connected cause for concern. The world is becoming assets known to security – has increased at more connected and distributed, which 67% of organizations. This shouldn’t come as creates a natural increase in the number of a surprise; between the rise of work-from- assets connected to the internet. Driving this home employees and the increased usage expansion, beyond increased cloud adoption of internet-accessible assets in the form of and greater use of SaaS applications and cloud applications and other solutions, it is services, companies have increased their a foregone conclusion that companies now reliance on third-party providers as well have more internet-exposed cyber assets introducing new risks and blindspots. The than before. problem? Visibility into these assets remains poor. 67% of organizations have seen their attack surface increase in the past two years. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 88 The result: more breaches. Sixty-nine (69) percent WHAT DO COMPANIES FIND of organizations have been compromised by an WITH AN EASM SOLUTION? unknown, unmanaged, or poorly managed internet- facing asset in the past 12 months. The preponderance of shadow IT is not an unusual problem. Randori 31% finds that organizations, on average, have 30% more exposed assets than tracked by traditional asset find unknowingly management programs. Inside that 30%, organizations exposed sensitive most frequently find they have unknowingly exposed data sensitive data, unknown or third-party hosted web assets, and unknown misconfigurations and vulnerable systems. 30% These areas: exposed sensitive data, have unknown or misconfigurations, and previously unknown web third-party hosted web assets assets are also among those into which enterprises have the least visibility overall. Given the commonality of attacks using unknown or unmanaged assets, it’s 29% absolutely critical for organizations to improve their attack surface visibility. have unknown misconfigurations On the plus side, enterprises largely acknowledge and vulnerable the need to improve attack surface monitoring. systems Unfortunately, this acknowledgement has not resulted in technology adoption. A significant number of organizations still rely on traditional IT asset management systems (40%) for discovery and broad cyber threat intelligence (41%) for alerts on new threats. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM THE STATE OF ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 2022 9 69% of organizations have experienced some type of cyber- attack in which the attack itself started through an exploit of an unknown, unmanaged, or poorly managed internet-facing asset – ESG While certainly valuable, asset management systems only cover assets that your IT and security team already know about and cyber threat intelligence solutions only inform you about known threats. Neither tool will automatically discover unknown or unmanaged facets of your attack surface – the key vector driving breaches today. By contrast, a dedicated attack surface management solution provides automated monitoring and continuous discovery that heightens visibility into your attack surface. Only 34% of organizations surveyed currently have that dedicated solution in their security stack. This puts 66% of companies at a disadvantage when it comes to visibility into their attack surface – almost the same percentage of organizations who’ve experienced a cyberattack because of unmanaged or unknown assets. Visibility into the attack surface must increase for enterprises to, at the very least, quantify their cyber attack risk. The data show that increasing one’s ability to quantify cyber risk is seen as one of the most effective ways of reducing attack surface risk. Without the visibility and continuous discovery of a dedicated ASM tool, organizations are far more likely to experience attacks for which they are unprepared. As attack surfaces continue to increase, visibility will continue to remain a significant concern. RANDORI.COM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 1100 CASE STUDY Armellini Logistics Experiences Shadow IT’s Impact In December of 2019, Armellini Logistics was the target of a sophisticated ransomware attack. They quickly recovered, but their IT team adopted a more proactive approach to cybersecurity following that incident. They quickly zeroed in on poor internet-facing asset visibility as a key gap and acquired Randori Recon to resolve the issue. As IT director Eric McManis said, “We had no way of knowing which of our assets an attacker would target first until we worked with Randori.” Critical for Armellini was not only visibility, but Randori’s Target Temptation scores, which proactively help flag exploitable or at risk systems for Armellini’s team. This unique approach provides Armellini with a daily prioritized list of risks from which they can take action. We had no way of knowing which of our assets an attacker would target first until we worked with Randori. – ERIC MCMANIS, IT DIRECTOR ARMELLINI LOGISTICS RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 1111 Tomorrow’s Threats, Yesterday’s Technology 3 in 4 Organizations Still Rely on Spreadsheets for Attack Surface Management In December 2021, the Log4j vulnerability sent security teams scrambling to understand their exposure. Within five hours, the Randori Hacker Operations Center had developed a working exploit and it didn’t take malicious attackers much longer than that to start widespread exploitation of Log4j. What started off as homogenous spray-and-prey has quickly become active targeting of specific app applications. – REMY, GREYNOISE INTELLIGENCE Within 48 hours, firms such as GreyNoise intelligence observed widespread attempts at exploitation. This proved what many had long feared: attackers are getting faster. Unfortunately, while attackers were already running, most organizations were still trying to understand if they were even exposed. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM THE STATE OF ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 2022 12 800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 2021-12-09 2021-12-10 2021-12-11 2021-12-12 RANDORI.COM sPI EUQINU Payload diversity dramatically increases. Application specific payloads first seen. GreyNoise first observes attempted exploitation. 2021-12-09: 9:46pm ET Randori first confirms exmploitability. Randori ASM customers begin receiving alerts of exposures. As attackers increasingly become more agile and aggressive, our research suggests most organizations are already behind when it comes to staying ahead of attackers. The average organization takes more than 80 hours to compile an updated inventory of their attack surface, TIME FOR ATTACK compared to 48 hours for attackers to develop a SURFACE DISCOVERY: working exploit. In the case of Log4j, that means the average organization was exposed and potentially under active attack for five days before they even knew if they were exposed. From this perspective, it is clear that the tools organizations rely on to manage their attack surfaces are not keeping pace. When 73% of organizations admit to still using spreadsheets to manage their attack surface, it’s no surprise that large enterprises have named external attack surface management their number one investment priority for 2022. THE STATE OF ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 2022 13 TOP THINGS THAT WOULD IMPROVE ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 31% 29% 25% Increasing the frequency Improving our ability Providing more attack of vulnerability scanning to analyze and assign surface management dedicated to discovering risk scores to assets training to security and and assessing the in our external attack IT staff posture of externally surface based on threat facing assets intelligence about their exploitability External attack surface management solutions eliminate the scramble associated with compiling an updated asset inventory. By continuously monitoring for exposed assets and alerting organizations when new risks arise, understanding your exposure to issues like Log4j is as simple as checking your email or logging into the console. This saves hundreds of hours of work a year and eliminates the risk of burnout. In the case of Log4j, Randori’s real-time visibility was the difference between being ahead of attackers or having to react attacks. That first weekend, we saw 4,000 Log4j related attacks against our environment... that we were already ahead of and had mitigated. Continuous monitoring and real-time alerting was the key here. – PHILIP KEIBLER, CISO MEIJER RANDORI.COM THE STATE OF ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 2022 14 External Attack Surface Management Is the Top Priority for 2022 31% of Enterprises Say EASM is #1 Investment Priority for 2022 What’s clear in our research is that organizations recognize that what they are doing today is not working. They take security hygiene seriously and are planning to increase investments in 2022 to improve their results. From the data, there is much room for improvement in this area, with 73% of organizations relying on spreadsheets to manage their dynamic attack surfaces. Meanwhile, just 34% of organizations have a dedicated external attack surface management solution. When asked what’s needed to move the needle, organizations were consistent on the biggest challenges they face – with better intelligence on exploitability and need for more continuous visibility being the most common areas of concern. TOP THINGS THAT WOULD IMPROVE ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT Ability to Use Latest Intelligence to Assign 1 Risk Scores & Prioritize by Exploitability 2 Increase Frequency of Discovery & Scanning Increase Awareness and Training Around 1 20 3 Just in Attack Surface Management vulnerabilities are ever exploited in the wild RANDORI.COM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 1155 In 2022, organizations plan to TOP INVESTMENTS ORGANIZATIONS ARE get serious about maturing their MAKING TO IMPROVE THEIR ATTACK SURFACE attack surface management MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS programs and are taking real steps to achieve them. The most common actions organizations #1 prioritizing investments in EASM are taking include increasing investments in external attack surface management (EASM) solutions, establishing formal #2 Establishing formal KPIs & metrics KPIs & metrics around their for attack surface management attack surface management programs and beginning to leveraging EASM solutions to derive greater value out of their #3 Leveraging EASM to improve penetration testing and red their penetration testing and red teaming efforts. team effectiveness RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM THE STATE OF ATTACK SURFACE MANAGEMENT 2022 16 Why Are Enterprises Starting with EASM? There are a few reasons why enterprises have decided to start with external attack surface management as their first step. Primary among these is that the attack surface is the first line of defense against attack. If you have a high number of unknown or unmanaged assets in your attack surface, then you are open to an attack that you may not see coming. IT and security leaders understand this, and enterprises by and large will spend 2022 focusing on enumerating their internet-facing assets and ensuring they monitor their attack surface. The next major issue is continuous visibility into the attack surface, which remains one of the biggest gaps. Visibility into your attack surface helps determine exposure risk; continuous visibility allows you to accurately evaluate and re-evaluate that risk. The average enterprise’s attack surface changes all the time, which is why the continuous component is key for visibility. In this way, you ensure the long-term viability of your EASM program. Lastly, it’s important to understand that EASM is only the beginning. As the attack surface of the average enterprise expands, organizations can’t stop with just identification, discovery, and monitoring. They must also improve their security controls through continuous testing and validation to ensure that their assets are protected and their infrastructure secure. RANDORI.COM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 1177 Conclusion Based on these findings, it’s clear that the current state of attack surface management has a long way to go. As organizations continue to recognize the importance of a robust and effective attack surface management program, we expect to continue to see high demand for solutions and expertise that help organizations take a more proactive approach to attack surface management for years to come. Organizations need to resolve their challenge with visibility into their growing attack surface, while also fixing the issue with slow and ineffective processes to move forward with a more secure architecture. EASM is the top priority for enterprises to resolve those issues, and gain the continuous visibility and streamlined processes necessary for the modern security landscape. RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF AATTTTAACCKK SSUURRFFAACCEE MMAANNAAGGEEMMEENNTT 22002222 1188 About Randori Randori attacks to protect. Recognized by Gartner & IDC as a leader in offensive security, the Randori Platform unifies Attack Surface Management (ASM) and Continuous Automated Red Teaming (CART) to provide enterprises the visibility, actionable insights and validation they need to proactively prevent breaches. Customers like VMWare, Greenhill Inc, FirstBank, NOV, Lionbridge and many more, trust the Randori platform, which was designed by the world’s foremost offensive security practitioners at nation-state levels. Connect with Randori to discover what’s exposed on your attack surface and learn more about the tempting targets on your perimeter. LEARN MORE → RRAANNDDOORRII..CCOOMM