NIST Cyber Risk Scoring (CRS) Program Overview February 2021 Agenda • CRS Project Background • Risk Profiling and Risk Scoring • Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) & Ongoing Authorization (OA) • Privacy Capabilities • Management Dashboards • Questions? 2 Assessing, Understanding, and Managing Security and Privacy Risks NIST’s Cyber Risk Scoring (CRS) Solution enhances NIST’s security & privacy Assessment & Authorization (A&A) processes by presenting real-time, contextualized risk data to improve situational awareness and prioritize required actions. Previous Process CRS Solution 3 Benefits of CRS • Integrated view of NIST risk posture across the enterprise with quantitative metrics across systems and components • More frequent, meaningful and actionable risk information to System Owners & Authorizing Officials • Improved efficiency through automating assessments of certain controls and auto-generation of ATO documentation • A data-driven basis for ongoing authorization decisions • Present the organization’s overall security posture from different perspectives, e.g., the Risk Management Framework (RMF) and Cyber Security Framework (CSF) 4 CRS Capabilities The CRS toolset provides end users the following capabilities: Archer: Tableau: • Prioritize security & privacy control assessments • View risk at multiple organizational levels • Manage A&A and significant change schedules • Integrate vulnerability data into risk scoring • Track Accepted Risks and POA&M milestones • Drill-down into specific assets and their current • Generate security and privacy documentation vulnerability exposures • Provide compliance and vulnerabilities scan results in • Respond to data calls quickly with details near-real time (e.g. CVEs and affected assets) • Analyze risks against the CSF 5 CRS Inputs These data are ingested into Archer and analyzed for presentation in Tableau. Automated Data Types / Asset Data Automated Risk Profile Vulnerability Questionnaire Data Responses Common ISCM Control A&A Results Descriptions System & POA&Ms and Archer Component Accepted Descriptions Risks 6 CRS Outputs After analysis users can generate ATO documentation on-demand & view metric-based risk management dashboards. CIO and Executive Dashboards Go-Live CSF Dashboards Dashboard Archer and Tableau System NIST Asset Security and Management Privacy Dashboard Dashboards Security & Privacy documents (SAP, SAR, PAR, PTA, & PIA) 7 Risk Profiling and Scoring 8 Risk Profiling Overview • Risk Profiling is a process that allows NIST to determine the importance of a system to the organization’s mission. • By first understanding the business and technical characteristics that impact system risk, an agency can identify and align controls to a component based on the likelihood that a weakness will be exploited and the potential impact to the organization. 1. Define 2. Develop Business 3. Determine Tailoring 4. Incorporate 5. Deploy Continuous Organization’s Risk and Technical Logic & Apply Compliance and Monitoring Factors and Priorities Characteristics Common Controls Vulnerability Data Organization’s Questionnaire is The Risk Profile Assessment, The Risk Profile priorities and risk created to reflect leverages Common compliance, and makes it possible to appetite is Control Providers vulnerability data is perform Continuous organization’s determined by and scoping continuously Monitoring of all business processes receiving input from considerations to recorded in the Risk implemented security and technical stakeholders to reduce the number of Profile to determine and privacy controls environment. customize a security controls to be the risk posture of by using a risk-based questionnaire that Likelihood and threat assessed, narrowing the information approach to will best fit the factors tied to these the scope of work system. prioritize control organization’s characteristics are while maintaining assessments. security needs. quantified. security awareness. Output: Applicable Output: Risk Profile Output: Risk Profile Output: Total View of Output: Metric Controls and Total Methodology Multiplier Risk Reports Potential Risk 9 Risk Scoring Variables Risk Scoring provides a foundation for quantitative risk-based analysis, assessment, and reporting of organizational IT assets. By applying ratings to controls and generating scores for components, stakeholders have a relative understanding of risk from one system compared to another. The variables that can affect a control’s potential risk score is outlined below. Variable Description Considerations Control Baseline Risk Score Every control is assigned an initial weighting (1-10) • What is the potential security impact of based on an analysis of its importance to the security this control to NIST? and privacy posture. Data Type Questionnaire Responses Initial CIA ratings (1-10) are assigned to controls, • What is the impact of Confidentiality (C), based on criticality of the information type(s), upon Integrity (I), and Availability (A) to the completion of the Data Type Questionnaire. types of information that are used within this component? Risk Profile Questionnaire Responses Additional adjustments are applied as indicated by • What assets or applications are part of responses to the Risk Profile Questionnaire, including the component? business risks. • What is potential security impact of this component to the enterprise? 10 Risk Calculation Overview The following steps are completed in Archer for each system component to calculate potential risk. Complete Questionnaires Generate Risk Profile Calculate Risk Score • Data Type Questionnaire: • The Risk Profile outlines the controls • The sumof all Component potential Determines an overall system that should be implemented. risk equals the System potential risk security category for the component, assigns the security control • Security controls are assigned ratings • Final scores include a multitude of “baseline” (Low/Moderate/High), for Confidentiality, Integrity, and security inputs (e.g., manual inputs, and calculates initial risk score Availability to quantify risks. vulnerabilities, compliance scans). modifier. • Components are assessed based on • Risk scores create the ability to make • Risk Profile Questionnaire: Performs their implementation of these “apples-to-apples” comparisons additional control scoping and controls. across the enterprise. calculates final risk score modifiers for the resulting set of applicable controls. 11 Information Security Continuous Monitoring and Ongoing Authorization Approach 12 ISCM and OA Overview ISCM promotes more frequent and targeted monitoring of system security and privacy posture to enable risk-based Ongoing Authorization (OA) decisions. Through CRS, NIST implements ISCM and OA by: • Prioritizing the set of controls to be evaluated for each assessment • Providing on-demand reporting of security and privacy metrics (SARs, SAPs, PAPs, and PARs) and management dashboard summaries 13 NIST System ATO Schedule • NIST has 46 operational systems + Common Controls • NIST System ATOs are on a semi-annual ATO Cycle • ATO status is managed in Cyber Risk Scoring solution (Archer) ATOs Expirations ~9/30 ATOs Expirations ~4/1 14 ISCM Schedule for Security Controls Security control assessments are prioritized based on importance to the organization (DoC Volatile Controls and Common Controls) and number of potential risk points. Sample Assessment Schedule Automated Assessment Type Scan Frequency Assessments Vulnerabilities Weekly Compliance Scans Monthly Web Applications Annually and as needed Controls Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Manual Assessments* DoC Volatile Controls Full control set assessed Common Controls annually Half of the control set is High Risk Controls* assessed each year One third of the control set is Moderate Risk assessed each year Controls* One sixth of the control set is Low Risk Controls* assessed each year 15 *Risk score ranges were determined by calculating baseline risk score multipliers Assessment Process 16 System Level Data Archer captures system information that supports ongoing assessment and authorization efforts. 17 Tailored Control Set Upon completion of the questionnaires, each component is provided with a tailored set of controls. 18 Control Assessment Input Assessors can document assessment results and supporting details in this interactive form. 19 SAP/SAR Generation The images below show the Security Assessment Plan (SAP) and Security Assessment Report (SAR) Assessors complete in Archer. Upon completion of assessments, the documentation is generated directly from Archer. Security Assessment Plan Security Assessment Report 20 Sample Assessor & Management Dashboards In Archer, role-based dashboards display task prioritization and management of A&A activities. Assessor Dashboard Management Dashboard 21 ISCM Status Tracker In Tableau, the Annual Assessment Progress report displays status of ISCM assessments by system. 22 Ongoing Authorization Historical data was evaluated to create initial risk thresholds in support of Ongoing Authorization decisions. • Current threshold: NIST-wide Accepted Risk Average (all time) • SOs and AOs can review a system’s current security posture and risk trend: o Risk scores at or below the NIST average threshold could result in automatic reauthorization o Risk scores that exceed the threshold may require further review and discussion Sample Data 23 Privacy 24 Aligning Privacy with CRS Privacy capabilities have been integrated into the CRS Solution to standardize security and privacy processes across NIST. End users can complete the following privacy activities in CRS: • Automate control assignments (NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4, Appendix J.) for systems that contain PII • Complete and generate on-demand DOC-required forms such as Privacy Threshold Analysis (PTA), Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA), and Annual Recertification • Perform privacy control assessments and generate required documentation on-demand (Privacy Assessment Report and Privacy Assessment Plan) • Quantify privacy risk based on CRS’s scoring methodology Privacy objectives (Predictability, Manageability, and Disassociability) scores are added together to calculate the Total Potential Risk for a single privacy control. 25 Integrating CRS with Privacy The following steps are completed in Archer for each system component to maintain privacy documentation and allocate applicable controls. Generate Annual PIA Complete PTA Complete PIA Recertification Form • A PTA is required for every system • The PIA collects information about • The PIA recertification form is the types of privacy data which is generated annually for ongoing stored and processed, why it is authorization • The PTA determines if a PIA is collected, and how it is handled required • It also ensures that any changes to the Systems, Components, or • Privacy controls are allocated as • CRS incorporates the current DOC privacy risks are identified and determined by the PIA PTA template mitigated 26 PTA/PIA Generation The images below show the PTA and PIA Questionnaires ISSOs complete in Archer. Upon completion of the questionnaires, the PIA, PTA, and PIA Recertification forms are generated from Archer. PTA and PIA Questionnaires PIA, PTA, and PIA Recertification forms 27 Enterprise Management Dashboards 28 Enterprise System Security Dashboard The Tableau dashboards supports NIST in maintaining ongoing awareness of information security and privacy to support organizational risk management decisions. 29 Sample Data Enterprise Vulnerability Trending Dashboard The dashboard below summarizes the organization’s active vulnerability trends over the past year. 30 Sample Data Enterprise Vulnerabilities Dashboard The dashboard below summarizes vulnerability scan results by system and categorizes vulnerabilities by severity exposure. 31 Sample Data Enterprise Secure Configuration Dashboard The dashboard below summarizes secure configuration scan results by system and categorizes findings by severity and exposure. 32 Sample Data Enterprise Web Vulnerability Dashboard The dashboard below summarizes WebInspect scan results by system and indicates web application vulnerabilities by risk posture and severity. 33 Sample Data Enterprise Asset Management Dashboard The dashboard below displays the total number of assets within the organization and allows end users to search by CVE number to identify assets impacted by specific vulnerabilities. 34 Sample Data System Privacy Dashboard The dashboard below summarizes privacy risk metrics for system stakeholders. 35 Sample Data Cybersecurity Framework Dashboard The dashboard below represents the organization’s performance against each function and category within the CSF. 36 Questions? 37 POCs Chris Enloe Christian.Enloe@nist.gov Sheldon Pratt Sheldon.Pratt@nist.gov Santi Kiran Santi.Kiran@nist.gov John Cascio John.Cascio@nist.gov 38