GUIDELINE ON
SECURITY MEASURES
UNDER THE EECC
4th Edition
JULY 2021
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
ABOUT ENISA
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, ENISA, is the Union’s agency dedicated to
achieving a high common level of cybersecurity across Europe. Established in 2004 and
strengthened by the EU Cybersecurity Act, the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
contributes to EU cyber policy, enhances the trustworthiness of ICT products, services and
processes with cybersecurity certification schemes, cooperates with Member States and EU
bodies, and helps Europe prepare for the cyber challenges of tomorrow. Through knowledge
sharing, capacity building and awareness raising, the Agency works together with its key
stakeholders to strengthen trust in the connected economy, to boost resilience of the Union’s
infrastructure, and, ultimately, to keep Europe’s society and citizens digitally secure.. More
information about ENISA and its work can be found at www.enisa.europa.eu.
CONTACT
For contacting the authors please use resilience@enisa.europa.eu
For media enquiries about this paper, please use press@enisa.europa.eu.
AUTHORS
Goran Milenkovic, Dr. Marnix Dekker, European Union Agency for Cybersecurity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
For the completion of this guideline ENISA has worked closely with a working group of experts
from national authorities, the ECASEC Expert Group (formerly known as the Article 13a Expert
Group). We are grateful for their valuable input, comments and support in the process of
developing of this document.
National authorities also organized a review of this document by providers in their countries. We
are grateful for the many useful comments and suggestions we received from experts in the
sector.
LEGAL NOTICE
Notice must be taken that this publication represents the views and interpretations of ENISA,
unless stated otherwise. This publication should not be construed to be a legal action of ENISA
or the ENISA bodies unless adopted pursuant to the Regulation (EU) No 2019/881.
This publication does not necessarily represent state-of the-art and ENISA may update it from
time to time. Third-party sources are quoted as appropriate. ENISA is not responsible for the
content of the external sources including external websites referenced in this publication.
This publication is intended for information purposes only. It must be accessible free of charge.
Neither ENISA nor any person acting on its behalf is responsible for the use that might be made
of the information contained in this publication.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE
© European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), 2021
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not under the ENISA copyright,
permission must be sought directly from the copyright holders.
ISBN: 978-92-9204-457-2 - DOI: 10.2824/44013
1
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION 7
1.1 TARGET AUDIENCE 7
1.2 GOAL 7
1.3 VERSIONS AND CHANGES 7
2. BACKGROUND 9
2.1 EU POLICY CONTEXT 9
2.2 ENISA’S ROLE 9
3. EECC DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY 10
3.1 EECC DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY 10
3.1.1 EECC: Articles 40 and 41 and relevant recitals 10
3.2 TERMINOLOGY 13
3.2.1 Security of networks and services 13
3.2.2 Security incidents 13
3.2.3 Competent authorities 13
3.2.4 Security measures 13
3.2.5 NI-ICS 13
4. SECURITY MEASURES 14
4.1 ASSETS IN SCOPE AND RISK ASSESSMENT 14
4.1.1 Primary and secondary assets 14
4.2 CRITICAL ASSETS 15
4.2.1 Personnel and key personnel 15
4.2.2 Third parties and outsourcing 15
4.3 STRUCTURE OF THE SECURITY MEASURES 15
4.4 SECURITY OBJECTIVES AND SECURITY MEASURES 17
4.4.1 D1: Governance and risk management 19
4.4.2 D2: Human resources security 22
4.4.3 D3: Security of systems and facilities 24
4.4.4 D4: Operations management 29
4.4.5 D5: Incident management 31
4.4.6 D6: Business continuity management 34
2
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.7 D7: Monitoring, auditing and testing 36
4.4.8 D8: Threat awareness 40
5. TECHNICAL SUPERVISION OF SECURITY MEASURES 42
5.1 MANDATING OR RECOMMENDING A SECURITY STANDARD 42
5.1.1 Mandating versus recommending a security standard 43
5.1.2 Using the ENISA guideline as a recommendation 43
5.1.3 Using the ENISA guideline as a mapping 43
5.1.4 Using existing national or international standards or best practices 44
5.2 ASSESSING COMPLIANCE ACROSS THE MARKET 44
5.3 SUPERVISION REGIME FOR NI-ICS PROVIDERS 46
5.4 TECHNOLOGY PROFILES 46
5.5 TAKING A STAGED APPROACH 47
5.6 AUDITING PROVIDERS 49
5.6.1 Assessment types 49
5.6.2 Auditor types 50
5.6.3 Audit timing and objectives 51
5.7 AUTHORISATIONS CONDITIONS 51
5.7.1 Authorisations 51
5.7.2 Conditions 51
6 MAPPING TO INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 53
5.8 MAPPING SECURITY DOMAINS 53
5.9 MAPPING SECURITY OBJECTIVES 55
6. REFERENCES 57
3
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
PREFACE
The 2009 reform of the EU legislative framework for electronic communications introduced
Article 13a and Article 13b as part of the Framework directive (Directive 2009/140/EC). This
reform was transposed into national legislation by EU Member States in 2011. Article 13a
requires MS to ensure that providers of electronic communications manage security risks and
take appropriate security measures to guarantee the security (paragraph 1) and integrity
(paragraph 2) of these networks and services. Article 13a (paragraph 3) requires providers to
notify significant security incidents to competent national authorities, who should report about
these incidents to ENISA and the European Commission (EC) annually. Article 13b outlines
how authorities can supervise and enforce compliance with these security requirements.
In 2010, ENISA, the European Commission, and experts from ministries and telecom regulators
in the EU Member States initiated a series of meetings to achieve an efficient and harmonised
implementation of Article 13a across the EU, forming the Article 13a Expert Group1. This
group is now chaired by an expert from a national competent authority in the EU and comprises
experts from competent authorities from all EU countries as well as from some EFTA and EU
candidate countries. The Article 13a Expert Group reached consensus about two non-binding
technical guidelines for implementing Article 13a: the “Technical Guideline on Incident
Reporting” and the “Technical Guideline on Security Measures”.
In December 2018, a new set of telecom rules called the European Electronic
Communications Code (abbreviated as EECC) was adopted. The EECC updates the EU
telecom package of 2009 and paves the way for the roll out of fibre, very high capacity networks
and next generation mobile networks (5G), which will create jobs and growth, enable new
application scenarios like internet of things (IoT) and new business models. An important part of
the EECC is consumer protection2 and security of electronic communications. EU countries
have to transpose this EU directive into national law by 21 December 2020.
Article 40 of the EECC, which replaces the above-mentioned Article 13a, contains detailed
security requirements for electronic communication providers. Article 41 of the EECC, which
replaces Article 13b, outlines how competent authority can enforce these security requirements.
Although the security requirements under the EECC are similar to the security requirements
under the Framework directive, there are important differences. An overview of the main
differences can be found in an ENISA policy paper about the EECC. As with Article 13a, ENISA
will support the EU Member States with the implementation of Article 40 of the EECC, to ensure
there is an effective, efficient, and harmonized approach to security supervision across the EU.
To reflect this legislative change the Article 13a group has changed its name to ECASEC,
European Competent Authorities for Secure Electronic Communications.
This document, the Guideline on Security Measures under the EECC, provides guidance to
competent authorities about the technical details of implementing Articles 40 and 41 of the
EECC: how to ensure that providers assess risks and take appropriate security measures.
1 Now known as the ‘ECASEC Expert Group’
2 In addition to protection of consumers, the EECC actually promotes interest of EU citizens. For example, one of the
objectives listed in the Article 3, paragraphs (d), is to “promote the interests of the citizens of the Union, by ensuring
connectivity and the widespread availability and take-up of very high capacity networks, including fixed, mobile and wireless
networks, and of electronic communications services”.
4
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
The structure of this guideline is as follows: The guideline lists 29 high-level security objectives,
which are grouped in 8 security domains. For each security objective we list specific detailed
security measures which could be taken by providers to reach the security objective. These
security measures are grouped in 3 levels of increasing sophistication. We also give examples
of evidence, which could be taken into account by an auditor, for example, when assessing if
these security measures are actually in place. The overall structure is depicted in the diagram
below.
Figure 1: Overall structure of the security objectives and security measures
One size does not fit all: Neither the high-level security objectives nor the detailed security
measures should be seen as binding recommendations about which are appropriate security
measures for providers to take. The reason is that the electronic communications sector is very
diverse; large incumbents, small service providers, black fibre operators, virtual mobile network
operators, ISPs offering only DSL, etc. In each setting the risks are different and it is up to the
providers to assess the risks and decide which are appropriate security measures to take. This
document is intended as a tool for competent authorities supervising the sector. It could be used
as a structure for self-assessments, audits and audit reports, guidance for providers, or as a
mapping to international network and information security standards used in the electronic
communications sector.
General security guideline supplemented by specific security profiles: The security
measures in this guideline are technology-neutral. They should be applicable to a wide range of
different types of technologies. As a supplement to this guideline we are developing more
detailed guidance for specific networks and technology, such as 5G. This security guideline,
together with the 5G supplement3, addresses the relevant technical measures in the EU toolbox
of risk mitigating measures for 5G networks.
3 https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/5g-supplement-security-measures-under-eecc
5
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Figure 2: Structure of the ENISA Guideline on Security Measures under the EECC
6
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
1. INTRODUCTION
This document provides technical guidance to the national authorities tasked with supervising
the security of electronic communication networks and services (hereinafter Competent
Authorities), and in particular the security measures mentioned in Article 40 the European
Electronic Communications Code4 (hereinafter EECC).
1.1 TARGET AUDIENCE
This guideline is for experts from competent authorities in the EU Member States tasked with
the implementation of Article 40 of the EECC.
This guideline may be useful also for experts working in the EU’s electronic communications
sector and experts working in cyber security.
1.2 GOAL
This document aims to give guidance to competent authorities about the security measures
described in Article 40 of the EECC and the enforcement described in Article 41 of the EECC.
1.3 VERSIONS AND CHANGES
ENISA updates this guideline periodically, when necessary, in agreement with the competent
authorities.
This fourth version of the Guideline constitutes an update to the Guideline published on 10
December 2020.
List of the main changes in the fourth version:
 Corrections to select measures and evidence in Security Objective 2: ‘Governance and
risk management’
 Updated the name of Security Objective 4 to ‘Security of third-party dependencies’ and
expanded its measure a)
 Amended the description underneath Security Objective 14: Protection of security
critical data’. Furthermore, amended measure a) and evidence i. of this objective
 Amended Section 5.8: ‘Mapping Security Domains’, primarily by way of additions
 Amended Section 5.9: ‘Mapping Security Objectives’, primarily by way of mapping
additional ISO27002:2013 controls
 Introduced corrections throughout the Guideline, including to referencing international
standards
4 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018L1972&from=EN
7
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Structure of this document
In Section 2 we summarize the role and objectives of ENISA related to the implementation of
Article 40 of the EECC. In Section 3 we introduce Article 40, the scope and the terminology
used in this document. In Section 4 we list 29 security objectives, divided in 9 domains, and we
provide details about security measures and evidence. In Section 5 we give guidance on
potential regulatory activities competent authorities could deploy to assess compliance to the
security measures required by Article 40 of the EECC. In Section 6 we provide a mapping from
the security measures in this guideline to some well-known international standards.
8
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
2. BACKGROUND
In this section we summarize the EU policy context and we explain ENISA’s role and objectives.
2.1 EU POLICY CONTEXT
The European Electronic Communications Code, the EECC, is an EU directive, meaning that
EU countries have to transpose it into national legislation. The deadline for this transposition
was 21 December 2020. The new EECC has now replaced the four EU directives. In this paper,
we refer to these directives as the “old rules”.
• The Framework Directive, which is based on the Framework Directive 2002/21/EC as
amended by Directive 2009/140/EC.
• The Access Directive, which is based on the Access Directive 2002/19/EC and amended
by Directive 2009/140/EC.
• The Authorisation Directive is based on the Authorisation Directive 2002/20/EC and
amended by Directive 2009/140/EC.
• The Universal Service Directive is based on the Universal Service Directive 2002/22/EC
and the Citizens' Rights Directive 2009/136/EC.
These rules were last modified in 2009 as part of a wider EU telecom reform, which included
also the ePrivacy directive5, addressing confidentiality and privacy in electronic communications
and the BEREC regulation6, establishing the Body of European telecom regulators.
2.2 ENISA’S ROLE
Article 40 of the EECC asks ENISA to facilitate harmonization on the security aspects.
The European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (‘ENISA’) shall facilitate, in
accordance with Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
(7), the coordination of Member States to avoid diverging national requirements that may create
security risks and barriers to the internal market.
5 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2002/58
6 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32009R1211&from=EN
7 Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 concerning the European
Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 460/2004 (OJ L 165,
18.6.2013, p. 41).
9
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
3. EECC DEFINITIONS AND
TERMINOLOGY
3.1 EECC DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
In this section we introduce the relevant parts of the EECC and the related terms used in this
document.
3.1.1 EECC: Articles 40 and 41 and relevant recitals
Most of the security requirements are contained in Article 40 and Article 41 of the EECC.
For the sake of reference we quote Article 40 and Article 41 in full below.
Article 40 Security of networks and services
1. Member States shall ensure that providers of public electronic communications
networks or of publicly available electronic communications services take appropriate
and proportionate technical and organisational measures to appropriately manage the
risks posed to the security of networks and services. Having regard to the state of the
art, those measures shall ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk presented.
In particular, measures, including encryption where appropriate, shall be taken to
prevent and minimise the impact of security incidents on users and on other networks
and services.
The European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (‘ENISA’) shall
facilitate, in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 526/2013 of the European Parliament
and of the Council (45), the coordination of Member States to avoid diverging national
requirements that may create security risks and barriers to the internal market.
2. Member States shall ensure that providers of public electronic communications
networks or of publicly available electronic communications services notify without
undue delay the competent authority of a security incident that has had a significant
impact on the operation of networks or services.
In order to determine the significance of the impact of a security incident, where
available the following parameters shall, in particular, be taken into account:
(a) the number of users affected by the security incident;
(b) the duration of the security incident;
(c) the geographical spread of the area affected by the security incident;
(d) the extent to which the functioning of the network or service is affected;
(e) the extent of impact on economic and societal activities.
Where appropriate, the competent authority concerned shall inform the competent
authorities in other Member States and ENISA. The competent authority concerned
may inform the public or require the providers to do so, where it determines that
disclosure of the security incident is in the public interest.
10
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Once a year, the competent authority concerned shall submit a summary report to the
Commission and to ENISA on the notifications received and the action taken in
accordance with this paragraph.
3. Member States shall ensure that in the case of a particular and significant threat of a
security incident in public electronic communications networks or publicly available
electronic communications services, providers of such networks or services shall
inform their users potentially affected by such a threat of any possible protective
measures or remedies which can be taken by the users. Where appropriate, providers
shall also inform their users of the threat itself.
4. This Article is without prejudice to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive
2002/58/EC.
5. The Commission, taking utmost account of ENISA’s opinion, may adopt
implementing acts detailing the technical and organisational measures referred to in
paragraph 1, as well as the circumstances, format and procedures applicable to
notification requirements pursuant to paragraph 2. They shall be based on European
and international standards to the greatest extent possible, and shall not prevent
Member States from adopting additional requirements in order to pursue the objectives
set out in paragraph 1.
Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination
procedure referred to in Article 118(4).
Article 41 Implementation and enforcement
1. Member States shall ensure that, in order to implement Article 40, the competent
authorities have the power to issue binding instructions, including those regarding the
measures required to remedy a security incident or prevent one from occurring when a
significant threat has been identified and time-limits for implementation, to providers of
public electronic communications networks or publicly available electronic
communications services.
2. Member States shall ensure that competent authorities have the power to require
providers of public electronic communications networks or publicly available electronic
communications services to:
(a) provide information needed to assess the security of their networks and
services, including documented security policies; and
(b) submit to a security audit carried out by a qualified independent body or a
competent authority and make the results thereof available to the competent
authority; the cost of the audit shall be paid by the provider.
3. Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities have all the powers
necessary to investigate cases of non-compliance and the effects thereof on the
security of the networks and services.
4. Member States shall ensure that, in order to implement Article 40, the competent
authorities have the power to obtain the assistance of a Computer Security Incident
Response Team (‘CSIRT’) designated pursuant to Article 9 of Directive (EU)
2016/1148 in relation to issues falling within the tasks of the CSIRTs pursuant to point
2 of Annex I to that Directive.
11
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5. The competent authorities shall, where appropriate and in accordance with national
law, consult and cooperate with the relevant national law enforcement authorities, the
competent authorities within the meaning of Article 8(1) of Directive (EU) 2016/1148
and the national data protection authorities.
In addition, we include full or partial text of several recitals that are of direct or indirect relevance
for ensuring security of networks and services:
(17) Interpersonal communications services are services that enable interpersonal and
interactive exchange of information, covering services like traditional voice calls
between two individuals but also all types of emails, messaging services, or group
chats. Interpersonal communications services only cover communications between a
finite, that is to say not potentially unlimited, number of natural persons, which is
determined by the sender of the communication.
(18) […] The mere use of a number as an identifier should not be considered to be
equivalent to the use of a number to connect with publicly assigned numbers and
should therefore, in itself, not be considered to be sufficient to qualify a service as a
number-based interpersonal communications service.
(94) […] Security measures should take into account, as a minimum, all the relevant
aspects of the following elements: as regards security of networks and facilities:
physical and environmental security, security of supply, access control to networks and
integrity of networks; as regards handling of security incidents: handling procedures,
security incident detection capability, security incident reporting and communication; as
regards business continuity management: service continuity strategy and contingency
plans, disaster recovery capabilities; as regards monitoring, auditing and testing:
monitoring and logging policies, exercise contingency plans, network and service
testing, security assessments and compliance monitoring; and compliance with
international standards.
(95) […] independent inter personal communications services, […] are also subject to
appropriate security requirements in accordance with their specific nature and
economic importance. Providers of such services should thus also ensure a level of
security appropriate to the risk posed. Given that providers of number -independent
interpersonal communications services normally do not exercise actual control over the
transmission of signals over networks, the degree of risk for such services can be
considered in some respects to be lower than for traditional electronic communications
services. Therefore, where justified on the basis of the actual assessment of the
security risks involved, the measures taken by providers of number-independent
interpersonal communications services should be lighter. […]
(96) Providers […] should inform users of particular and significant security threats and
of measures they can take to protect the security of their communications, for instance
by using specific types of software or encryption technologies. […]
(97) In order to safeguard security of networks and services, and without prejudice to
the Member States’ powers to ensure the protection of their essential security interests
and public security, and to permit the investigation, detection and prosecution of
criminal offences, the use of encryption for example, end-to-end where appropriate,
should be promoted and, where necessary, encryption should be mandatory in
accordance with the principles of security and privacy by default and by design.
(98) Competent authorities should ensure that the integrity and availability of public
electronic communications networks are maintained. The European Union Agency for
12
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Network and Information Security (‘ENISA’) should contribute to an enhanced level of
security of electronic communications by, inter alia, providing expertise and advice,
and promoting the exchange of best practices. The competent authorities should have
the necessary means to perform their duties, including powers to request the
information necessary to assess the level of security of networks or services. They
should also have the power to request comprehensive and reliable data about actual
security incidents that have had a significant impact on the operation of networks or
services. They should, where necessary, be assisted by Computer Security Incident
Response Teams (‘CSIRTs’) established by Directive (EU) 2016/ 1148 of the
European Parliament and of the Council8. In particular, CSIRTs may be required to
provide competent authorities with information about risks and security incidents
affecting public electronic communications networks and publicly available electronic
communications services, and recommend ways to address them.
3.2 TERMINOLOGY
We reiterate some of the definitions and terms used extensively in this document.
3.2.1 Security of networks and services
Article 2 (21) of the EECC defines ‘security of networks and services’ as the ability of electronic
communications networks and services to resist, at a given level of confidence, any action that
compromises the availability9, authenticity10, integrity11 or confidentiality12 of those networks and
services, of stored or transmitted or processed data, or of the related services offered by, or
accessible via, those electronic communications networks or services.
3.2.2 Security incidents
Article 2 (42) of the EECC defines ‘security incident’ as an event having an actual adverse effect
on the security of electronic communications networks or services.
3.2.3 Competent authorities
The term ‘competent authorities’ is used in this document in line with the terminology used in
Article 41 of the EECC, meaning those national authorities with competences to supervise
Article 40, the implementation of security measures in the national telecom sector13. In practice
these competences may be split or shared between multiple national authorities.
3.2.4 Security measures
Article 40 of the EECC defines ‘security measures’ as technical and organisational measures for
managing the risks posed to the security of networks and services.
3.2.5 NI-ICS
Article 2 (7) of the EECC defines a ‘number-independent interpersonal communications service’
as an interpersonal communications service, which does not connect with “publicly assigned
numbering resources”, meaning (national or international) telephone numbers, or which does
not enable communication with these (national or international) telephone numbers. In this
document we use the acronym NI ICS for the sake of brevity.
8 Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high
common level of security of network and information systems across the Union (OJ L 194, 19.7.2016, p. 1).
9Availability is typically defined as a property of being accessible and usable on demand by an authorized entity (ISO/IEC
27000:2018)
10 Authenticity is typically defined as a property that an entity is what it claims to be (ISO/IEC 27000:2018)
11 Integrity is typically defined as a property of accuracy and completeness (ISO/IEC 27000:2018)
12 Confidentiality is typically defined as a property that information is not made available or disclosed to unauthorized
individuals, entities, or processes (ISO/IEC 27000:2018)
13 Previous versions of this guideline used the abbreviation NRA, National Regulatory Authority.
13
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4. SECURITY MEASURES
In this section we provide a list of 29 security objectives which competent authorities should
take into account when assessing compliance of providers to Article 40 of the EECC.
We stress that this is only a guideline for competent authorities and that it is at the discretion of
competent authorities to mandate or recommend different or additional security objectives, or
different security measures.
Note that some of the security objectives or security measures may not be relevant or
appropriate in all settings for all types of providers, depending on the type of networks or
services offered14.
4.1 ASSETS IN SCOPE AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The scope of the security measures is defined as follows.
Assets in scope: All assets15 of the provider (including relevant third party assets) which, when
compromised and/or failing, can have a negative impact on the security of networks and
services.
Providers should perform analysis, specific for their particular setting, to determine which assets
are in scope and should subsequently conduct risk assessment to determine which security
measures are appropriate. Risk assessments need updating, to address changes and past
incidents, because risks change over time. Note that this guideline does not address risk
assessment in detail. There are several standard methodologies providers could use for this
(see References).
Remark on classical information security risk management: It is good to mention here that
there is a lot of information security literature which focusses on how an organization can
manage the information security risks related to the use of network and information security, for
example through the establishment of an information security management system. A well-
known example of a related standard is ISO 27001. Article 40 of the EECC, however, focuses
primarily on risks for the users who rely on the networks and communications services provided
by the provider, and not the risks for the provider. This means in practice that, while enterprise
risk management methodologies are very helpful, they may not be fully suitable to be used for
the EECC without adaptation.
4.1.1 Primary and secondary assets
In some literature there is a distinction between primary assets and secondary (supporting)
assets. In this context (Article 40 of the EECC) the primary assets are the electronic
communication networks and services provided by the provider.
In this document when we speak about assets we mean the secondary assets i.e. the systems
and processes supporting the provision of electronic communications networks and services
(such as base stations, routers, registers, power supply, etc.).
14 For example, in the case of dark fibre providers certain security measures may not be applicable because these
providers do not directly deal with subscribers and do not have much staff.
15 A widely used generic definition of an asset is “something that has value”. We provide more details about assets in
sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2.
14
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.2 CRITICAL ASSETS
In the remainder of this document, we use the term critical assets for assets (network and
information systems, processes, data, etc.) which, when compromised and/or fail, there would
be a severe impact on the security of networks and services. When determining severity of the
impact, factors like type (e.g. whether the materialisation of a threat leads to compromised
confidentiality, integrity and/or availability of the network) and scale of impact (e.g. in terms of
affected users, duration, sensitivity of information altered or accessed) could be considered16.
Parameters related to determination of significance of the impact of a security incident as listed
in EECC Article 40 (2) and reproduced in section 3.1 should also be taken into account.
Critical assets should (obviously) be protected with priority.
4.2.1 Personnel and key personnel
In this document the term “personnel” refers to employees, contractors, and third-party users.
We use the term “key personnel” to refer to the key roles in the organization with respect to
security of networks and services. Now providers are not all the same and organizations and job
profiles are different, but typically this would include roles like the CEO, the CIO, the CISO, the
business continuity manager and system administrators of critical systems.
4.2.2 Third parties and outsourcing
In this document we use the term “third parties” to refer to parties (organizations, individuals) the
provider works with to deliver the services, i.e. vendors the provider buys products from,
suppliers, consultants who advise the provider, auditors auditing the provider, companies the
provider outsources work to, and so on17.
Third parties and third party assets are in scope just as if they were assets of the providers. In
other words, even if certain processes are outsourced, the provider remains responsible for
ensuring that appropriate security measures are taken to protect the security of networks and
services it is providing.
4.3 STRUCTURE OF THE SECURITY MEASURES
This document lists 29 security objectives18 which have been derived from a set of international
and national standards that are commonly used by providers in the EU’s electronic
communication sector (see References). For each of the security objectives we list more
detailed security measures which could be implemented by providers to reach the security
objective. For each security objective we also list detailed evidence which could indicate that the
measures are in place. Note that the security measures or the evidence should not be seen as
a baseline or list of minimum requirements for providers (see the remark below).
The security measures are grouped in 3 different sophistication levels, defined as follows.
16 These criteria are in line with the criteria used in the EU Coordinated risk assessment of the cybersecurity of 5G
networks. Further guidance related to critical asset identification pertaining to 5G networks specifically is provided in the
supplement of this document - security profile for 5G MNOs.
17 Therefore, in this document, the term ‘third parties’ does not refer to customers, the public, or government or regulatory
authorities.
18 In information security governance literature these are also sometimes referred to as ‘control objectives’.
15
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Figure 3: Structure of the security measures
The levels are cumulative. In other words, at level 2 we do not repeat the security measures and
the evidence for level 1, for the sake of brevity, but they are understood to be included
(accumulated). And similarly at level 3 the security measures are understood to include the
ones of levels 1 and 2. If the measures at level 1 are not (fully) implemented than this could be
called level 0, but we do not explicitly mention level 0 in this document.
The overall structure of the security objectives and security measures is depicted as following.
Figure 4: Overall structure of the security objectives and security measures
16
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Remark about baselines and minimum security measures: Neither the high-level security
objectives in this document nor the detailed security measures should be seen as binding
recommendations about which are appropriate security measures for providers to take. So, for
example, the security measures at level 1 are not to be considered “the minimum” for the sector.
Risks are different for different providers and it depends on the specifics (the setting, the type of
provider, the type of services offered, the assets in question, etc.) which security objectives are
important and which measures are appropriate.
Remark about separate measures: We list a number of individual security measures, one by
one. But this should not be seen as a recommendation to split security activities into parts, or to
keep separate standalone documents or files for each measure. For example, one could
imagine using a single inventory of assets could be used for risk assessment, change
management and asset management procedures.
Remark about technological limitations and implementation feasibility: Some of the
recommended measures may be more difficult (or not simply not feasible) to implement in an
old or legacy systems with outdated equipment, using old technology and/or relying on old
standards and network protocols. In such cases, it is advisable to have limitations and
exclusions stated and documented and to consider including formal decommissioning plans for
these old or legacy systems.
4.4 SECURITY OBJECTIVES AND SECURITY MEASURES
Below we list 29 high-level security objectives (SO1, SO2, etc.), grouped in 8 domains (D1, D2,
etc.). For each security objective we list detailed security measures, which could be
implemented by the provider, as well as the type of evidence that could be taken into
consideration by an auditor, for example, when assessing if measures are in place.
We list the 8 domains and the 29 security objectives below for the sake of reference:
D1: GOVERNANCE AND RISK MANAGEMENT
SO1: Information security policy
SO2: Governance and risk management
SO3: Security roles and responsibilities
SO4: Security of third party dependencies
D2: HUMAN RESOURCES SECURITY
SO5: Background checks
SO6: Security knowledge and training
SO7: Personnel changes
SO8: Handling violations
D3: SECURITY OF SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES
SO9: Physical and environmental security
SO10: Security of supplies
SO11: Access control to network and information systems
SO12: Integrity of network and information systems
SO13: Use of encryption
SO14: Protection of security critical data
D4: OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
SO15: Operational procedures
SO16: Change management
SO17: Asset management
17
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
D5: INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
SO18: Incident management procedures
SO19: Incident detection capability
SO20: Incident reporting and communication
D6: BUSINESS CONTINUITY MANAGEMENT
SO21: Service continuity strategy and contingency plans
SO22: Disaster recovery capabilities
D7: MONITORING, AUDITING AND TESTING
SO23: Monitoring and logging policies
SO24: Exercise contingency plans
SO25: Network and information systems testing
SO26: Security assessments
SO27: Compliance monitoring
D8: THREAT AWARENESS
SO28: Threat intelligence
SO29: Informing users about threats
18
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.1 D1: Governance and risk management
The domain “Governance and risk management” covers the security objectives related to
governance and management of network and information security risks.
4.4.1.1 SO1: Information security policy
Establish and maintain an appropriate information security policy.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Set a high level security policy i. Documented security policy,
addressing the security of networks including networks and services in
and services. scope, critical assets supporting
them, and the security objectives.
b) Make key personnel aware of the
security policy. ii. Key personnel are aware of the
security policy and its objectives
(interview).
2
c) Set detailed information security iii. Documented information security
policies for critical assets and business policies, approved by
processes. management, including applicable
law and regulations, accessible to
d) Make all personnel aware of the
personnel.
security policy and what it implies for
their work. iv. Personnel are aware of the
information security policy and
e) Review the security policy following
what it implies for their work
incidents.
(interview).
v. Review comments or change logs
for the policy.
3
f) Review the information security vi. Information security policies are up
policies periodically, and take into to date and approved by senior
account violations, exceptions, past management.
incidents, past tests/exercises, and
vii. Logs of policy exceptions,
incidents affecting other (similar)
approved by the relevant roles.
providers in the sector.
viii. Documentation of review process,
taking into account changes and
past incidents.
4.4.1.2 SO2: Governance and risk management
Establish and maintain an appropriate governance and risk management framework, to identify
and address risks for the communications networks and services.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Make a list of the main risks for i. List of main risks described at a
security of networks and services, high level, including the underlying
taking into account main threats for the threat(s) and their potential impact
critical assets. on the security of networks and
services
b) Make key personnel aware of the main
risks and how they are mitigated. ii. Key personnel know the main risks
(interview).
19
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
2
c) Set up a risk management iii. Documented risk management
methodology and/or tools based on methodology and/or tools.
industry standards.
iv. Guidance for personnel on
d) Ensure that key personnel use the risk assessing risks.
management methodology and tools.
v. List of risks and evidence of
e) Review the risk assessments following updates/reviews.
changes or incidents.
vi. Review comments or change logs
f) Ensure residual risks are accepted by for risk assessments.
management.
vii. Management approval of residual
risks.
3
g) Review the risk management viii. Documentation of the review
methodology and/or tools, periodically, process and updates of the risk
taking into account changes and past management methodology and/or
incidents. tools.
4.4.1.3 SO3: Security roles and responsibilities
Establish and maintain an appropriate structure of security roles and responsibilities.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Assign security roles and i. List of security roles (CISO, DPO,
responsibilities to personnel. business continuity manager, etc.),
who occupies them and contact
b) Make sure the security roles are
information.
reachable in case of security incidents.
2
c) Personnel is formally appointed in ii. List of appointments (CISO, DPO,
security roles. etc.), and description of
responsibilities and tasks for
d) Make personnel aware of the security
security roles (CISO, DPO, etc.).
roles in your organisation and when
they should be contacted. iii. Awareness/dissemination material
for personnel explaining security
roles and when/how they should be
contacted.
3
e) Structure of security roles and iv. Up-to-date documentation of the
responsibilities is regularly reviewed structure of security role
and revised, based on changes and/or assignments and responsibilities
past incidents.
v. Documentation of review process,
taking into account changes and
past incidents.
20
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.1.4 SO4: Security of third-party dependencies
Establish and maintain a policy, with security requirements for contracts with third parties (see
Section 4.2.2), to ensure that dependencies on third parties do not negatively affect security of
networks and/or services.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Include security requirements in i. Explicit security requirements in
contracts with third-parties, including the contracts with third parties
confidentiality and secure transfer of supplying IT products, IT services,
information. outsourced business processes,
helpdesks, call centres,
interconnections, shared facilities,
etc.
2
b) Set a security policy for contracts ii. Documented security policy for
with third-parties. contracts with third parties.
c) Ensure that all procurement of iii. List of contracts with third-parties.
services/products from third-parties
iv. Contracts for third party services
follows the policy.
contain security requirements, in
d) Review security policy for third line with the security policy for
parties, following incidents or procurement.
changes.
v. Review comments or change logs
e) Demand specific security standards of the policy.
in third-party supplier’s processes
vi. Contracts with equipment suppliers
during procurement.
contain requirements for adhering
f) Mitigate residual risks that are not to security best practices and
addressed by the third party. industry standards19.
vii. Residual risks resulting from
dependencies on third parties are
listed and mitigated.
3
g) Keep track of security incidents viii. List of security incidents related to
related to or caused by third-parties. or caused by engagement with
third-parties.
h) Periodically review and update
security policy for third parties at ix. Documentation of the policy review
regular intervals, taking into account process.
past incidents, changes, etc.
19 This should include demonstrating quality levels of information security processes, security maintenance of products and
equipment throughout its lifetime and security built into the product development processes.
21
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.2 D2: Human resources security
The domain “Human resources security” covers the security objectives related to personnel.
4.4.2.1 SO5: Background checks
Perform appropriate background checks20 on personnel if required for their duties and
responsibilities.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Check professional references of key i. Documentation of checks of
personnel (system administrators, professional references for key
security officers, guards, etc.). personnel.
2
b) Perform background checks/screening ii. Policy and procedure for
for key personnel, when needed and background checks/screenings.
legally permitted.
iii. Guidance for personnel about
c) Set up a policy and procedure for when/how to perform background
background checks. checks/screenings.
3
d) Review and update policy/procedures iv. Review comments or change logs
for background checks and reference of the policy/procedures.
checks at regular intervals, taking into
account changes and past incidents.
4.4.2.2 SO6: Security knowledge and training
Ensure that personnel have sufficient security knowledge and that they are provided with
regular security training.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Provide key personnel with relevant i. Key personnel have followed
training and material on security security trainings and have
issues. sufficient security knowledge
(interview).
2
b) Implement a program for training, ii. Personnel have participated in
making sure that key personnel have awareness sessions on security
sufficient and up-to-date security topics.
knowledge.
iii. Documented program for training
c) Organise trainings and awareness on security skills, including
sessions for personnel on security objectives for different roles and
topics important for your organisation. how to reach them (by e.g. training,
awareness raising, etc.).
3
d) Review and update the training iv. Updated security awareness and
program periodically, taking into training program
account changes and past incidents.
v. Results of tests of the security
e) Test the security knowledge of knowledge of personnel.
personnel.
vi. Review comments or change logs
for the program.
20 Background checks should be appropriate and proportionate to the risk assessed, in particular when they apply to
personnel other than providers’ own employees, e.g. for contractors and third-party users.
22
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.2.3 SO7: Personnel changes
Establish and maintain an appropriate process for managing changes in personnel or changes
in their roles and responsibilities.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Following changes in personnel revoke i. Evidence that personnel changes
access rights, badges, equipment, have been followed up with
etc., if no longer necessary or revocation of access rights, badges,
permitted. equipment, etc.
b) Brief and educate new personnel on ii. Evidence that new personnel has
the policies and procedures in place. been briefed and educated about
policies and procedures in place.
2
c) Implement policy/procedures for iii. Documentation of process for
personnel changes, taking into personnel changes, including
account timely revocation of access responsibilities for managing
rights, badges and equipment. changes, description of rights of
access and possession of assets per
d) Implement policy/procedures for
role, procedures for briefing and
education and training for personnel in
training personnel in new roles.
new roles.
iv. Evidence that personnel changes
have been carried out according to
the process and that access rights
have been updated timely (e.g.
checklists).
3
e) Periodically check that the v. Evidence of checks of access rights
policy/procedures are effective. etc.
f) Review and evaluate policy/procedures vi. Up to date policy/procedures for
for personnel changes, taking into managing personnel changes.
account changes or past incidents.
vii. Review comments or change logs.
4.4.2.4 SO8: Handling violations
Establish and maintain a disciplinary process for personnel who violate security policies and
have a broader process that covers security incidents caused by violations by personnel.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Hold personnel accountable for i. Rules for personnel, including
security incidents caused by violations responsibilities, code of conduct,
of policies, for example via the violations of policies, etc., possibly as
employment contract. part of employment contracts.
2
b) Set up procedures for violations of ii. Documentation of procedures,
policies by personnel. including types of violations which
may be subject to disciplinary
actions, and which disciplinary
actions may be taken.
3
c) Periodically review and update the iii. Review comments or change logs
disciplinary process, based on
changes and past incidents.
23
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.3 D3: Security of systems and facilities
This domain “Security of systems and facilities” covers the physical and logical security of
network and information systems and facilities.
4.4.3.1 SO9: Physical and environmental security
Establish and maintain the appropriate physical and environmental security of network and
information systems and facilities.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Prevent unauthorized physical access i. Basic implementation of physical
to facilities and infrastructure and set security measures and
up adequate environmental controls, to environmental controls , such as
protect provider assets21 against door and cabinet locks, burglar
unauthorized access, burglary, fire, alarm, fire alarms, fire extinguishers,
flooding, etc.22 etc.
2
b) Implement a policy for physical security ii. Documented policy for physical
measures and environmental controls. security measures and
environmental controls, including
c) Industry standard implementation of
description of facilities and systems
physical and environmental controls.
in scope.
d) Apply reinforced controls for physical
iii. Physical and environmental controls,
access to critical assets23.
like electronic control of entrance and
audit trail, segmentation of spaces
according to authorization levels,
automated fire extinguishers with
halocarbon gases, etc.
iv. The policy includes lists of critical
assets and reinforced physical
controls for accessing these assets.
3
e) Evaluate the effectiveness of physical v. Up to date policy for physical security
and environmental controls measures and environmental
periodically. controls
f) Review and update the policy for vi. Documentation about evaluation of
physical security measures and environmental control, review
environmental controls taking into comments or change logs.
account changes and past incidents.
21 Including third party assets, where applicable.
22 Security controls should be selected based on the risk assessment, which should also take in consideration current and
forecasted environmental security risks – e.g. related to climate change.
23 For example, physical access to such assets should only be granted to a limited number of security-vetted, trained and
qualified personnel. Access by third-parties, contractors, and employees of suppliers/vendors, integrators, should be limited
and monitored.
24
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.3.2 SO10: Security of supplies
Establish and maintain appropriate security of critical supplies (for example electric power, fuel,
cooling etc.24).
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Ensure security of critical supplies. i. Security of critical supplies is
protected in a basic way, for
example, backup power and/or
backup fuel is available.
2
b) Implement a policy for security of ii. Documented policy to protect critical
critical supplies. supplies such as electrical power,
fuel, etc., describing different types of
c) Implement industry standard security
supplies, and the security measures
measures to protect critical supplies
protecting the supplies.
and supporting facilities (e.g. passive
cooling, automatic restart after power iii. Evidence of industry standard
interruption, battery backup power, measures to protect the security of
diesel generators, backup fuel, etc.). critical supplies
3
d) Implement state of the art security iv. Evidence of state of the art measures
measures to protect critical supplies to protect security of critical supplies.
(such as active cooling, UP, hot
v. Updated policy for securing critical
standby power generators, SLAs with
supplies and supporting facilities,
fuel delivery companies, redundant
review comments and/or change
cooling and power backup systems).
logs.
e) Review and update policy and
procedures to secure critical supplies
regularly, taking into account changes
and past incidents.
4.4.3.3 SO11: Access control to network and information systems
Establish and maintain appropriate (logical) access controls for access to network and
information systems.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Users and systems have unique ID’s i. Access logs show unique identifiers
and are authenticated before for users and systems when granted
accessing services or systems. or denied access.
b) b) Implement logical access control ii. Overview of authentication and
mechanism for network and access control methods for systems
information systems to allow only and users.
authorized use.
24 Only examples are given, the list is not exhaustive. Critical supplies could be any other supplies that essential for
providers to provide the service.
25
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
2
c) Implement policy for protecting access iii. Access control policy including
to network and information systems, description of roles, groups, access
addressing for example roles, rights, rights, procedures for granting and
responsibilities and procedures for revoking access.
assigning and revoking access rights.
iv. Different types of authentication
d) Choose appropriate authentication mechanisms for different types of
mechanisms, depending on the type of access.
access.
v. Log of access control policy
e) Monitor access to network and violations and exceptions, approved
information systems, have a process by the security officer.
for approving exceptions and
vi. Principles of least privilege and
registering access violations.
segregation of duties are
f) Reinforce controls for remote access documented and applied where
to critical assets of network and appropriate.
information systems by third parties.
vii. Remote access to critical assets by
third-parties is minimised and
subjected to strict access controls,
including state of the art
authentication, authorization and
auditing controls, especially for
privileged accounts.
3
g) Evaluate the effectiveness of access viii. Reports of (security) tests of access
control policies and procedures and control mechanisms.
implement cross checks on access
ix. Tools for detection of anomalous
control mechanisms.
usage of systems or anomalous
h) Access control policy and access behaviour of systems (such as
control mechanisms are reviewed and intrusion detection and anomaly
when needed revised. detection systems).
x. Logs of intrusion detection and
anomaly detection systems.
xi. Updates of access control policy,
review comments or change logs.
xii. Documented risk analysis for the
application of logging and retention
xiii. Procedures to ensure that access
controls are in effect all the time and
that they evolve with the network.
26
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.3.4 SO12: Integrity of network and information systems
Establish and maintain integrity of network and information systems and protect from viruses,
code injections, and other malware that can alter the functionality of systems.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Make sure software of network and i. Software and data in network and
information systems is not tampered information systems is protected
with or altered, for instance by using using input controls, firewalls,
input controls and firewalls. encryption and signing.
b) Check for malware on (internal) ii. Malware detection systems are
network and information systems. present, and up to date.
2
c) Implement industry standard security iii. Documentation about how the
measures, providing defence-in-depth protection of software and data in
against tampering and altering of network and information system is
systems. implemented.
d) Apply reinforced software integrity, iv. Tools for detection of anomalous
update and patch management usage of systems or anomalous
controls for critical assets in virtualised behaviour of systems (such as
networks. intrusion detection and anomaly
detection systems).
v. Logs of intrusion detection and
anomaly detection systems.
vi. Adequate tools and processes to
ensure software integrity25 when
performing software updates and
applying security patches to critical
assets in virtualised networks.
3
e) Set up state of the art controls to vii. State of the art controls to protect
protect integrity of systems. integrity of systems, such as code
signing, tripwire, etc.
f) Evaluate and review the effectiveness
of measures to protect integrity of viii. Documentation of process for
systems. checking logs of anomaly and
intrusion detection systems.
4.4.3.5 SO13: Use of encryption
Ensure adequate use of encryption to prevent and/or minimise the impact of security incidents
on users and on other networks and services.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Where appropriate to prevent and/or i. Description of main data flows, and
minimise the impact of security the encryption protocols and
incidents on users and on other algorithms used for each flow.
networks and services, encrypt data26
ii. Description of justified exclusions and
during its storage in and/or
limitations27 in implementing
transmission via networks.
encryption.
25 Including reliable identification, monitoring and tracking of changes and the status of patches.
26 The type and scope of data to be encrypted should be determined based on the risk assessment performed and will
typically include communication data, customer critical data (e.g. unique identifiers), relevant management and signalling
traffic and any other data or metadata, the disclosure or tampering of which may cause security incidents.
27 Ability to implement encryption may also be influenced by technological limitations, like in the case of legacy networks or
when old equipment and network protocols are used.
27
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
2
b) Implement encryption policy. iii. Documented encryption policy
including details about the
c) Use industry standard encryption
cryptographic algorithms and
algorithms and the corresponding
corresponding cryptographic keys,
recommended lengths of encryption
according to international best
keys.
practices and standards.
iv. Documented justified exclusions that
provide rationale for when data is not
encrypted, including the related
impact assessment.
3
d) Review and update the encryption v. Updated encryption policy, review
policy. comments and/or change logs.
e) Use state of the art encryption vi. Encryption policy includes details
algorithms. about the state of the art
cryptographic protocols used.
4.4.3.6 SO14: Protection of security critical data
Ensure that cryptographic key material and secret authentication information are adequately
protected.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Make sure that cryptographic key i. Cryptographic key material and
material and secret authentication secret authentication information are
information (including cryptographic protected using security best
key material used for authentication) practices and standards for
are not disclosed or tampered with. protection mechanisms (like split
knowledge and dual control,
b) Access to private keys is strictly
encryption, hashing, secure
controlled and monitored.
hardware etc.).
ii. Description of mechanisms for
controlling and monitoring access to
private keys.
2
c) Implement policy for management of iii. Key management policy including
cryptographic keys. roles, responsibilities and controls for
the use, protection and lifetime of
d) Implement policy for management of
cryptographic keys throughout their
user passwords.
life cycle including controls for
access to and backup and recovery
of private keys.
iv. User password management policy
including processes, methods and
techniques for secure storing of user
passwords using industry best
practices28.
3
e) Review and update of key v. Updated key management policy,
management policy. review comments and/or change
logs.
f) Review and update of user password
management policy. vi. Updated user password management
policy, review comments and/or
change logs.
28 E.g. hashing using appropriate hashing algorithms, salting etc.
28
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.4 D4: Operations management
The domain “Operations management” covers operational procedures, change management
and asset management.
4.4.4.1 SO15: Operational procedures
Establish and maintain operational procedures for the operation of critical network and
information systems by personnel.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Set up operational procedures and i. Documentation of operational
assign responsibilities for operation of procedures and responsibilities for
critical systems. key network and information
systems.
2
b) Implement a policy for operation of ii. Documented policy for operation of
systems to make sure all critical critical systems, including an
systems are operated and managed in overview of network and information
line with predefined procedures. systems in scope.
3
c) Review and update the iii. Updated policy/procedures for critical
policy/procedures for operation of systems, review comments and/or
critical systems, taking into account change logs.
incidents and/or changes.
4.4.4.2 SO16: Change management
Establish change management procedures for critical network and information systems in order
to minimise the likelihood of incidents resulting from changes.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Follow predefined methods or i. Documentation describing predefined
procedures when making changes to methods or procedures followed
critical systems when making changes to critical
systems.
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for ii. Documentation of change
change management, to make sure management policy/procedures,
that changes of critical systems are including systems subject to the
always done following a predefined policy, objectives, roll back
way. procedures, etc.
c) Document change management iii. For each change, a report is available
procedures, and record for each describing the steps and the result of
change the steps of the followed the change.
procedure.
3
d) Review and update change iv. Up to date change management
management procedures regularly, procedures, review comments and/or
taking into account changes and past change logs.
incidents.
29
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.4.3 SO17: Asset management
Establish and maintain asset management procedures and configuration controls in order to
manage availability of critical assets and configurations of critical network and information
systems.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Identify critical assets and i. List of critical assets and critical
configurations of critical systems. systems. The list should include all
critical assets and critical systems for
network or service, operational and
security, including relevant third party
assets.
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for asset ii. Documented policy/procedures for
management and configuration asset management, including roles
control. and responsibilities, the assets and
configurations that are subject to the
policy, the objectives of asset
management.
iii. An asset inventory or inventories,
containing critical assets and the
dependency between assets.
iv. A configuration control inventory or
inventories, containing configurations
of critical systems.
3
c) Review and update the asset v. Up to date asset management
management policy regularly, based policy/procedures, review comments
on changes and past incidents. and/or change logs.
30
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.5 D5: Incident management
The domain “Incident management” covers detection of, response to, incident reporting, and
communication about incidents29.
4.4.5.1 SO18: Incident management procedures
Establish and maintain procedures for managing incidents, and forwarding them to the
appropriate personnel (triage).
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Make sure personnel is available and i. Personnel is aware of how to deal
prepared to manage and handle with incidents and when to escalate.
incidents.
ii. Inventory of major incidents per
b) Keep a record of all major incidents. incident, impact, cause, actions
taken and lessons learnt.
2
c) Implement policy/procedures for iii. Policy/procedures for incident
managing incidents. management, including, types of
incidents that could occur, objectives,
roles and responsibilities, detailed
description, per incident type, how to
manage the incident, when to
escalate to senior management (e.g.
CISO) etc.
3
d) Investigate major incidents and draft iv. Individual reports of the handling of
final incident reports, including actions major incidents.
taken and recommendations to
v. Up to date incident management
mitigate future occurrence of this type
policy/procedures, review comments
of incident.
and/or change logs.
e) Evaluate incident management
policy/procedures based on past
incidents.
29 For the definition of ‘incident’ used in this document, see Section 2.
31
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.5.2 SO19: Incident detection capability
Establish and maintain an incident detection capability that detects incidents30.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Set up processes or systems for i. Documented examples of past
incident detection. incidents that were detected and
timely forwarded to the appropriate
people.
2
b) Implement industry standard systems ii. Incident detection systems and
and procedures for incident detection. procedures, such as Security
Incident and Event Management
c) Implement systems and procedures for
(SIEM) tools, security helpdesk for
registering and forwarding incidents
personnel, reports and advisories
timely to the appropriate people.
from Computer Emergency
Response Teams (CERTs), tools to
spot anomalies, etc.
iii. Network Operation Centres (NOC)
and/or Security Operation Centres
(SOC)31 for ensuring visibility and
effective network monitoring and to
detect anomalies and to identify and
avoid threats.
3
d) Review systems and processes for iv. Up to date documentation of incident
incident detection regularly and update detection systems and processes.
them taking into account changes and
v. Documentation of review of the
past incidents.
incident detection process, review
e) Implement state of the art systems and comments, and/or change logs.
procedures for incident detection.
vi. NOC/SOC solutions with state of the
art capabilities are used - e.g. SOAR
(Security Orchestration, Automation
and Response), ensuring integration
with threat and vulnerability
management and incident response
function, security operations
automation etc.
30 Measures to detect incidents described under this security objective should be understood in a broader sense as to be
able to also detect serious events that may lead to incidents
31 Where justified on the basis of the actual assessment of the security risks involved, operators should run their NOC
and/or SOC on premise, inside the country and/or inside the EU.
32
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.5.3 SO20: Incident reporting and communication
Establish and maintain appropriate incident reporting and communication procedures, taking
into account national legislation on incident reporting to government authorities32.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Communicate and report about on- i. Evidence of past communications
going or past incidents to third parties, and incident reporting.
customers, and/or government
authorities, when necessary.
2
b) Implement policy and procedures for ii. Documented policy and procedures
communicating and reporting about for communicating and reporting
incidents. about incidents, describing
reasons/motivations for
communicating or reporting
(business reasons, legal reasons
etc.), the type of incidents in scope,
the required content of
communications, notifications or
reports, the channels to be used, and
the roles responsible for
communicating, notifying and
reporting.
iii. Templates for incident reporting and
communication.
3
c) Evaluate past communications and iv. List of incident reports and past
reporting about incidents. communications about incidents.
d) Review and update the reporting and v. Up to date incident response and
communication plans, based on communication policy, review
changes or past incidents. comments, and/or change logs.
32 For example, Article 40 of the EECC, which is being transposed by all EU member states to national legislation, included
requirement to report to a competent authority security incident that has had a significant impact on the operation of
networks or services.
33
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.6 D6: Business continuity management
The domain “Business continuity management” covers continuity strategies and contingency
plans to mitigate major failures and natural or man-made disasters.
4.4.6.1 SO21: Service continuity strategy and contingency plans
Establish and maintain contingency plans and a strategy for ensuring continuity of networks and
communication services provided.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Implement a service continuity strategy i. Documented service continuity
for the communications networks strategy, including recovery time
and/or services provided. objectives for key services and
processes
2
b) Implement contingency plans for ii. Contingency plans for critical
critical systems. systems, including clear steps and
procedures for common threats,
c) Monitor activation and execution of
triggers for activation, steps and
contingency plans, registering
recovery time objectives.
successful and failed recovery times.
iii. Decision process for activating
d) Implement contingency plans for
contingency plans.
dependent and inter-dependent critical
sectors and services33. iv. Logs of activation and execution of
contingency plans, including
decisions taken, steps followed, final
recovery time.
v. Map of critical sectors and services
essential for and/or dependent on
the continuity of the network and
service operation and contingency
plans for mitigating the impact
related to dependent and
interdependent sectors and services.
3
e) Review and revise service continuity vi. Up to date continuity strategy and
strategy periodically. contingency plans, review
comments, and/or change logs.
f) Review and revise contingency plans,
based on past incidents and changes.
33 When determining dependent critical sectors and services, providers may take into account those services that are
dependent on the continuity of the network and service operation which are essential for the maintenance of critical societal
and/or economic activities and for which an incident would have significant disruptive effects on the provision of that
service. One possible way for identifying such dependent services may be to pass the obligation to service consumers to
inform the providers if their service is considered critical.
34
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.6.2 SO22: Disaster recovery capabilities
Establish and maintain an appropriate disaster recovery capability for restoring network and
communication services in case of natural and/or major disasters.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Prepare for recovery and restoration of i. Measures are in place for dealing
services following disasters. with disasters, such as failover sites
in other regions, backups of critical
data to remote locations, etc.34
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for ii. Documented policy/procedures for
deploying disaster recovery deploying disaster recovery
capabilities. capabilities, including list of natural
and/or major disasters that could
c) Implement industry standard disaster
affect the services, and a list of
recovery capabilities, or be assured
disaster recovery capabilities (either
they are available from third parties
those available internally or provided
(such as national emergency
by third parties).
networks).
iii. Industry standard implementation of
disaster capabilities, such as mobile
equipment, mobile sites, failover
sites, etc.
3
d) Set up state of the art disaster recovery iv. State of the art disaster recovery
capabilities to mitigate natural capabilities, such as full redundancy
and/major disasters. and failover mechanisms to handle
natural and/or major disasters.
e) Review and update disaster recovery
capabilities regularly, taking into v. Updated documentation of disaster
account changes, past incidents, and recovery capabilities in place, review
results of tests and exercises. comments and/or change logs
34 Not all of the listed evidence may be applicable in scenarios with large geographically extended national telco networks,
for assets offering direct connectivity to end users.
35
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.7 D7: Monitoring, auditing and testing
The domain “Monitoring, auditing and testing” covers monitoring, testing and auditing of network
and information systems and facilities.
4.4.7.1 SO23: Monitoring and logging policies
Establish and maintain systems and functions for monitoring and logging of relevant security
events in critical network and communication systems.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Implement monitoring and logging of i. Logs and monitoring reports of critical
critical systems. network and information systems.
2
b) Implement policy for logging and ii. Documented policy for monitoring
monitoring of critical systems. and logging, including minimum
monitoring and logging requirements,
c) Set up tools for monitoring critical
retention period, and the overall
systems
objectives of storing monitoring data
d) Set up tools to collect and store logs of and logs.
critical systems.
iii. Tools for monitoring systems and
collecting logs.
iv. List of monitoring data and log files,
in line with the policy.
3
e) Set up tools for automated collection v. Tools to facilitate structural recording
and analysis of monitoring data and and analysis of monitoring and logs.
logs.
vi. Updated documentation of monitoring
f) Review and update logging and and logging policy/procedures,
monitoring policy/procedures, taking review comments, and/or change
into account changes and past logs.
incidents.
36
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.7.2 SO24: Exercise contingency plans
Establish and maintain policies for testing and exercising backup and contingency plans, where
needed in collaboration with third parties.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Exercise and test backup and i. Reports of past exercises of backup
contingency plans to make sure and contingency plans.
systems and processes work and
personnel is prepared for large failures
and contingencies.
2
b) Implement a program for exercising ii. Exercise program for backup and
backup and contingency plans contingency plans, including types of
regularly, using realistic scenarios contingencies, frequency, roles and
covering a range of different scenarios responsibilities, templates and
over time. procedures for conducting exercises,
templates for exercise reports.
c) Make sure that the issues and lessons
learnt from exercises are addressed by iii. Reports about exercises and drills
the responsible people and that the showing the execution of
relevant processes and systems are contingency plans, including lessons
updated accordingly. learnt from the exercises.
iv. Issues and lessons learnt from past
exercises have been addressed by
the responsible people
3
d) Review and update the exercise plans, v. Updated exercise plans, review
taking into account changes, past comments, and/or change logs.
incidents and contingencies which
vi. Input from suppliers and other third
were not covered by the exercise
parties involved about how to
program.
improve exercise scenarios.
e) Involve suppliers and other third parties
in exercises, for example business
partners and customers.
37
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.7.3 SO25: Network and information systems testing
Establish and maintain policies for testing network and information systems35, particularly when
connecting to new networks or systems.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Test networks and information systems i. Test reports of the network and
before using them or connecting them information systems, including tests
to existing systems. after big changes or the introduction
of new systems.
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for testing ii. Policy/procedures for testing
network and information systems. networks and information systems,
including when tests must be carried
c) Implement tools for automated testing.
out, test plans, test cases, test report
templates.
3
d) Review and update the iii. List of test reports.
policy/procedures for testing, taking
iv. Updated policy/procedures for testing
into account changes and past
networks and information systems,
incidents.
review comments, and/or change
log.
4.4.7.4 SO26: Security assessments
Establish and maintain an appropriate policy for performing security assessments of network
and information systems.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Ensure critical systems undergo i. Reports from past security scans and
security scans and security testing security tests.
regularly, particularly when new
systems are introduced and following
changes.
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for ii. Documented policy/procedures for
security assessments and security security assessments and security
testing. testing, including, which assets, in
what circumstances, the type of
security assessments and tests,
frequency, approved parties (internal
or external), confidentiality levels for
assessment, test results and the
objectives of security assessments
and tests.
35 Testing in this context refers primarily to testing of security related functionality, rather than to general-purpose ICT
functionality testing
38
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
3
c) Evaluate the effectiveness of iii. List of reports about security
policy/procedures for security assessments and security tests.
assessments and security testing.
iv. Reports of follow up actions on
d) Review and update policy/procedures assessments and test results.
for security assessments and security
v. Up to date policy/procedures for
testing, taking into account changes
security assessments and security
and past incidents.
testing, review comments, and/or
change log.
4.4.7.5 SO27: Compliance monitoring
Establish and maintain a policy for monitoring compliance to standards and legal requirements.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Monitor compliance to standards and i. Reports describing the result of
legal requirements. compliance monitoring.
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for ii. Documented policy/procedures for
compliance monitoring and auditing. monitoring compliance and auditing,
including what (assets, processes,
infrastructure), frequency, guidelines
who should carry out audits (in- or
external), relevant security policies
that are subject to compliance
monitoring and auditing, the
objectives and high level approach of
compliance monitoring and auditing,
templates for audit reports.
iii. Detailed monitoring and audit plans,
including long term high level
objectives and planning
3
c) Evaluate the policy/procedures for iv. List of all compliance and audit
compliance and auditing. reports
d) Review and update the v. Updated policy/procedures for
policy/procedures for compliance and compliance and auditing, review
auditing, taking into account changes comments, and/or change logs.
and past incidents.
39
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.8 D8: Threat awareness
The domain “Threat awareness” covers security objectives related to threat intelligence and to
outreach to end-users for the purpose of sharing the information about major threats to the
security of networks and services.
4.4.8.1 SO28: Threat intelligence
Establish and maintain appropriate mechanisms for monitoring and collecting information about
relevant threats to the security of networks and services.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Perform regular threat monitoring. i. Regular monitoring of external threat
intelligence feeds (OSINT,
commercial feeds, security
researches etc.36) with a recorded
log of relevant significant threat
events.
ii. Informal and ad-hoc sharing of
relevant threat intelligence with
relevant organisations on bilateral
basis.
2
b) Implement threat intelligence program. iii. Documented and implemented threat
intelligence program that includes
roles, responsibilities, procedures
and mechanisms for collecting
information related to significant
threats and corresponding mitigation
measures.
iv. The program also includes
mechanisms for systematic sharing
of threat intelligence with relevant
organisations on bilateral and
multilateral basis using a dedicated
threat intelligence sharing platform
(e.g. MISP).
v. Appropriate information marking
scheme in place for facilitation of
sharing of sensitive threat
information (e.g. TLP).
3
c) Review and update the threat vi. Updated threat intelligence program,
intelligence program. review comments and/or change
logs.
d) Threat intelligence program makes use
of state of the art threat intelligence vii. Threat intelligence platform (TIP) with
systems. state of the art functionality is used
(e.g. consolidation of threat
intelligence feeds from various
sources, automation, security
analytics and integration with other
security tools etc.)
36 Information sources should be relevant, current and credible and may include known threat intelligence reports, such as
ENISA Threat Landscape (https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/threat-risk-management/threats-and-trends/enisa-threat-
landscape) or various other threat reports by commercial entities, industry associations or academia.
40
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
4.4.8.2 SO29: Informing users about threats
Inform users of particular and significant security threats to network or service that may affect
the end-user and of the measures they can take to protect the security of their communications.
Security measures Evidence
1
a) Inform end-users of communication i. Security bulletin, a dedicated threat
networks and services about particular information web page or another
and significant security threats to documented and tested mechanism
network or service that may affect for reaching out to end-users in case
them. of significant threats.
ii. Documented lists of best practices
and security recommendations for
end-users to mitigate typical risks
(e.g. encryption, strong
authentication, updates, backups,
user awareness etc.).
2
b) Implement policy/procedures for iii. Documented and implemented end-
regular update of end-users about user outreach policy with defined
security threats to network or service roles and responsibilities,
that may affect them. mechanisms and criteria for
identifying significant threats and
procedures, tools and methods for
timely and appropriate informing of
end-users.
iv. The policy includes mechanisms for
identifying and sharing
recommendations and best practices
for end-users to mitigate specific
threats.
3
c) Review and update the v. Updated outreach policy, review
policy/procedures for regular update of comments and/or change logs.
end-users about security threats to
network or service that may affect
them.
41
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5. TECHNICAL SUPERVISION
OF SECURITY MEASURES
The principles of security supervision under the new rules (Article 40 and 41 of the EECC) are a
continuation of the old rules (Article 13a and Article 13b of the Framework directive). Under the
new rules, as with under the old rules:
 Communication providers have to assess risks, take appropriate security measures
and report significant incidents to competent authorities (Article 13a of the Framework
directive, Article 40 of the EECC).
 Competent authorities should have powers to supervise this, to enquire about
measures in place, and to investigate cases of non-compliance by providers (Article
13b of the Framework directive, Article 41 of the EECC).
This means that for the new rules competent authorities can build on the experience and
practice developed under the old rules.
The most common regulatory activities of competent authorities regarding supervision of
security measures are 37:
 Mandating or recommending a security standard
 Assessing compliance across the market
 Taking a staged approach to supervision
 Auditing providers (periodically, at random, and/or post-incident)
In the remainder of this section we discuss the technical aspects of each of these activities.
5.1 MANDATING OR RECOMMENDING A SECURITY STANDARD
There could be several reasons for mandating or recommending a standard of security
measures:
 to provide guidance about what security measures should be implemented, for
example by explaining high-level objectives or detailed security measures.
 to provide a terminology for discussing about security objectives or security
measures.
 to provide a structure for supervision and auditing, by dividing security in different
domains.
 to provide a baseline, i.e. a minimum set of security measures that must be in place,
for example because without basic security measures it may be difficult to conduct an
audit, because key evidence, like logs, records about incidents, etc. may be missing.
 to provide a mapping between different existing standards, for example, to be able to
compare compliance and audit reports which are based on different standards.
Following we go into detail about the different options.
37 This list is based on input from a survey, asking competent authorities across the EU, which are the activities they are
deploying or planning to deploy.
42
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5.1.1 Mandating versus recommending a security standard
When discussing the supervision of security legislation by government authorities there is often
a discussion about whether or not the government authority should mandate a specific list of
security measures, strongly recommend them, or just recommend them as guidance. One could
argue that mandating a standard would create clarity about what providers need to do to be
compliant. On the other hand, one could also argue that in most settings the sector, the
organizations involved, the technology used, is just too diverse to allow for a single checklist of
minimum security measures for the entire sector. Often only very high-level security standards
could be reasonably applied to a wider number of organizations. Inevitably such high-level
standards leave a lot of important technical details unaddressed. So it is hard to capture all the
security requirements of Article 40 of the EECC comprehensively in one standard. At the same
time for specific settings or specific issues the competent authority could mandate specific
security measures to be taken. For instance, a competent authority could ask all providers to
provide the competent authority with a contact point in case of contingencies, or ask all
providers to have 4 hours of backup power for their base station controllers.
Note that when mandating security measures for specific aspects, it is important that competent
authorities discuss with providers about effectiveness and feasibility beforehand. Such
discussions could be triggered by large incidents or focus happened in the past period, frequent
root causes, and/or other common issues (for example, about software vulnerabilities in
common IT equipment).
Best practices in network and information security are rapidly changing, because information
technology changes rapidly and because the capability of attackers changes rapidly. The
competent authority is in a unique role to support and foster the exchange of and discussion
about best practices between experts of different providers. In this way the competent authority
supports that best practices are adopted across the sector. Especially providers with less
experience and less expertise could benefit greatly from such discussions and exchanges.
5.1.2 Using the ENISA guideline as a recommendation
Competent authorities could use this ENISA guideline to provide guidance to providers. The
ENISA guideline consists of 29 high level security objectives derived from different standards
(see References). To reach the security objectives, providers should choose appropriate
technical security measures. This document lists detailed security measures which providers
could take to reach the security objectives. The security measures are split in three
(sophistication) levels ranging from 1) basic, to 2) industry standard, to 3) state of the art.
Providers should assess the risks to their communications networks and services to understand
which security measures are appropriate.
5.1.3 Using the ENISA guideline as a mapping
Many (especially larger) providers already have a security standard or a security governance
framework in place, often based on international standards. This ENISA guideline could be used
as a neutral mapping to different standards in use by the industry. Such a mapping would allow
providers to continue use existing international standards, and it would avoid incurring
unnecessary costs for providers when complying with the requirements of Article 40 of the
EECC.
In practice, for example, providers could show compliance to Article 40 of the EECC by
providing audit reports or certification against existing industry standards, combined with a
mapping from these standards to this ENISA guideline. In Section 6 we provide an example of
such a mapping to some well-known international security standards.
43
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5.1.4 Using existing national or international standards or best practices
Competent authorities could refer to existing national or international standards or requirements,
either as a baseline requirement or as a recommendation. An overview of standards widely
used in the industry is included in the section References. Competent authorities should take
into account national circumstances when choosing an appropriate set of standards or best
practices. We would like to make three remarks in this regard:
 Competent authorities should take into account that some (especially the large)
providers may operate in several EU countries, and that it would be cumbersome for
these providers to adopt different standards in different countries. In this respect it
could be useful to allow providers to use international standards which are widely used
across the EU and in this way reduce compliance costs for these providers.
 In most countries the electronic communications sector is large (hundreds of providers)
and contains both large providers (>10% of market share) and very small ones (<1% of
market share). Competent authorities should also take into account the differences
between the providers in their country. What might work for large providers may well
be overwhelming for smaller providers, and vice versa, what might work for one
provider might be inappropriate for another provider.
 Finally, competent authorities should take into account that best practices in network
and information security are rapidly changing, because information technology
changes rapidly and because the capability of attackers changes rapidly. This makes it
hard to capture the high-level security requirement of Article 40 of the EECC
comprehensively in a list of detailed security measures. In this light, competent
authorities should focus first on supervising that providers assess risks and proactively
take appropriate security measures, rather than on trying to cast detailed security
measures in stone.
5.2 ASSESSING COMPLIANCE ACROSS THE MARKET
Self-assessments could be used to get an overview of the kind of security measures taken by
providers, across the sector. The security objectives and measures listed in Section 4 can be
used directly in self-assessment forms. The sophistication levels (see Section 4) would allow
providers to indicate, per security objective, what kind of security measures are in place. Used
in this way the sophistication levels would allow for a quick comparison between providers
across the sector. We give an example in the diagram below. Here the red bars indicate the
level of sophistication of the security measures taken by one provider, while the green bars
show the levels for a provider with less sophisticated security measures. Such a difference in
sophistication may be justified by a difference in the type of services or networks being offered
by the two providers.
Figure 5: Example of two different providers (green and red), with security measures at different
levels of sophistication.
44
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Depending on the motivation behind the assessment the competent authority could focus on a
subset of security objectives. For example, a competent authority could be interested in a
domain like business continuity or specific security objectives around change management.
Competent authorities could also restrict self-assessments to a subset of the sector, for instance
providers with a certain number of users (more than 10% market share e.g.), a certain service
(mobile networks, e.g.), or providers offering certain critical services (communications for ports
and airports e.g.).
We provide two simplified examples of how a competent authority could set up a self-
assessment form. In the first example, the competent authority assesses security measures
across all providers in the sector, but with a focus on a subset of the security objectives.
Example: The competent authority of country D has organized a self-assessment focused
on governance and risk management (domain D1 in the ENISA guideline). Self-assessment
forms are emailed to all providers:
Indicate your estimate market share: (choose from <1%, >10%, >10%)
Indicate which service you are offering: (fixed/mobile telephony, fixed/mobile
internet)
Per security objective, indicate the level of sophistication and if you can produce
evidence.
SO1: Information security policy
Sophistication level: (choose from 0, 1, 2, 3). Evidence exists: (choose from yes, no).
SO2: Governance and risk management framework
Sophistication level: (choose from 0, 1, 2, 3). Evidence exists: (choose from yes, no).
SO3: Security roles and responsibilities
Sophistication level: (choose from 0, 1, 2, 3). Evidence exists: (choose from yes, no).
SO4: Managing third party networks or services
Sophistication level: (choose from 0, 1, 2, 3). Evidence exists: (choose from yes, no).
In the second example the competent authority focuses on a subset of security measures and a
subset of providers:
Example: The competent authority in country E wants to focus on the issues behind a
number of large mobile network outages in the past year which are caused by power cuts,
cable cuts, and natural disasters. The competent authority focusses on the security
measures which are most relevant in this context. Self-assessment forms are sent only to
mobile network operators with large market share (>10%). Questions are a combination of
multiple choice and open questions for a description of security measures in place, and open
questions for the type of evidence that the provider can produce to substantiate answers.
For each of the security objectives SO9 (Physical and environmental security), SO10
(Security of supplies), SO21 (Service continuity strategy and contingency plans),
SO22 (Disaster recovery capabilities), SO24 (Exercise contingency plans), indicate the
45
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
level of sophistication, on a scale from 0 to 3 (0 none, 1 basic, 2 industry standard, 3
state of the art):
Describe the security measures in place to reach the objective: (max 200 words)
Describe the evidence you could provide to the competent authority which could substantiate
that measures are in place: (0 none, 1 internal documentation, 2 audit report from external
auditor)
Remark about confidentiality: Self-assessment results or profiles could be sensitive and it is
important to ensure confidentiality of results from other providers and/or the public. It is
important to explain clearly the purpose of the assessment (for example, by explaining that
there are no regulatory consequences) and to give explicit guarantees to providers about
confidentiality of the results.
5.3 SUPERVISION REGIME FOR NI-ICS PROVIDERS
In general, the security provisions in the EECC for NI-ICS are the same as for the number-
based services. Both are subject to (normal) ex-ante, supervision, and are required to provide
information, submit to security audits and be subjected to investigation of non-compliance by
the competent authorities. However, because these providers of do not normally exercise actual
control over the transmission networks, there may be different risks for these providers, and
certain security measures may not be needed, if justified on the basis of a risk assessment38.
See the recital 95:
(95) […] independent inter personal communications services, […] are also
subject to appropriate security requirements in accordance with their specific
nature and economic importance. Providers of such services should thus also
ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk posed. Given that providers of
number -independent interpersonal communications services normally do not
exercise actual control over the transmission of signals over networks, the
degree of risk for such services can be considered in some respects to be
lower than for traditional electronic communications services. Therefore,
where justified on the basis of the actual assessment of the security risks
involved, the measures taken by providers of number-independent
interpersonal communications services should be lighter. […]
In practice this means that, depending on the setting, the type of network or service offered, the
assets involved, etc., some of the security measures in this guideline may not be fully applicable
to NI-ICS providers. When assessing the compliance of providers with Article 40, competent
authorities should take into account the type of network or service offered, the assets involved,
the threats and resulting risks for this network or service.
5.4 TECHNOLOGY PROFILES
This guideline on security measures is technology neutral. To provide more specific guidance
for specific types of network/service providers, we supplement this guideline with “security
profiles”, for technologies like 5G or providers NI ICS. These security profiles supplement this
38 Security Supervision under the EECC, ENISA, January 2020, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/supporting-the-
implementation-of-the-european-electronic-commmunications-code-eecc/
46
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
generic and technology-agnostic guideline. The following supplementary security profiles are
under development and will be published separately:
 Security profile for 5G MNOs, containing supplementary guidance for technical
supervision of security measures for 5G MNOs;
 Security profile for NI-ICS providers, containing supplementary guidance on number-
independent interpersonal communication services (NI-ICS).
Figure 6: ENISA Guideline on Security Measures under the EECC – Technologies Supplements
5.5 TAKING A STAGED APPROACH
Depending on the national circumstances, competent authorities might want to adopt a staged
approach in supervising (and enforcing) compliance to the security requirements of Article 40 of
the EECC. In case some providers do not (yet) have appropriate security measures in place (or
if they cannot provide evidence of this), competent authorities may want to give providers some
time to comply, in stages. Competent authorities could use this guideline to adopt a staged
approach. We discuss some possible options for staging:
 Services or assets in scope: One could first focus on a subset of services (for
example mobile networks) or a subset of assets (for example, core network), and deal
with other services later.
Example: The competent authority in country A wants to focus first on the mobile
networks, because they are (nationally) the most critical. The competent authority
starts with a self-assessment across providers of mobile networks. The scope of
the assessment is ‘assets supporting mobile networks’. Other services are out of
scope initially, as well as providers who do not offer mobile telephony networks.
47
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
 Providers in scope: One could first focus on a subset of providers, for example
providers with a large market share, and look at other providers at a later stage.
Example: The competent authority in country B wants to focus first on the providers
with large market share, because here a lot of users are at stake. The competent
authority starts with collecting self-assessment reports from the main providers
(>10% of market share). The survey is followed up by a series of workshops where
the main causes of incidents are discussed. Next year the competent authority will
start a separate supervision program for smaller providers (focussed more on
guidance).
 Security domains: One could first focus on a subset of security objectives, business
continuity for example, and focus on other objectives at a later stage.
Example: The competent authority in country C wants to focus first on the main
incidents, taking into account the incidents reported by providers. Since last year in
country A the incidents were mostly due to natural disasters, in the supervision the
competent authority focusses first on the measures SO9, SO10, SO21, SO22,
SO24. The competent authority will address other security measures at a later
stage.
 Sophistication levels and baselines: Competent authorities could first focus on
ensuring that all providers have taken the basic security measures, for example level 1
as defined in this guideline, and only later focus on ensuring that providers take more
sophisticated security measures. We should stress here that such an approach would
have limitations: particularly when the sector has both large and small providers: For
large providers basic security measures may be insufficient, while for small providers
they could be more than enough. It would be better to take differences across the
sector into account and define different baselines for providers of different size.
Example: The competent authority in country D defines two profiles as baselines.
 The first profile contains the basic security measures for only the domains
D1 Governance and risk management, D2 Human resource security, D3
Security of systems and facilities, – it is the baseline for small providers
(<10% market share.
 The second profile contains industry standard security measures for all
domains (D1, … D8)– it is the baseline for large providers (>10% of market
share).
At a later stage the competent authority will review the profiles, and where needed
raise the requirements in some areas or define different baselines for other types of
providers (IXPs e.g.).
48
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5.6 AUDITING PROVIDERS
Depending on the setting, competent authorities might want to require providers to undergo an
audit. Depending on the setting and the goal of auditing different types of audits may be
needed. In this section we discuss different options for auditing providers.
Note that auditing is not always easy because network and information systems are often
complex. To understand if specific subsystems are working correctly, an auditor may need to
have deep knowledge and expertise: in security the devil is in the details. To give one simple
example: An auditor may find there is a firewall in place to protect certain systems, but the
detailed firewall rules determine greatly the effectiveness of the firewall. One rule with one
mistake may make the entire firewall useless.
Remark about audit costs: Competent authorities should take into account the costs of third-
party audits for providers, particularly the smaller providers. Self-assessments (see previous
section) may be a more light-weight approach.
Remark about efficiency of audits: A frequent complaint from organizations subject to
information security audits is that auditing often forces them to generate a lot of paper work, and
that this is not only useless but that it also diverts resources from the actual task at hand:
making the network and information systems secure. Competent authorities should take into
account that some providers are already partaking in compliance or certification programs
(voluntarily or in the context of different legislation) and are already undergoing (internal or
external) audits. If auditing is needed, it is important to leverage where possible existing audit
reports and compliance evidence.
Remark about language and international operators: When requesting documentation or
evidence from providers, competent authorities should take into account that providers may
keep certain relevant documentation (manuals, policies, procedures, etc.) in the English
language for efficiency reasons, because the provider operates in several countries or because
the operator employs personnel from abroad.
5.6.1 Assessment types
An audit involves different types of assessments, for example a review of security policies or an
interview with the CISO about contingency planning. Audits usually consist of a combination of
different types of assessments. We discuss the different types below:
 Document review: Document review is essential in any audit. Relevant documents
may include descriptions of policies, roles and responsibilities, descriptions of
processes and procedures, systems architecture and design, test procedures and
actual test results. Chapter 4 of this guideline includes descriptions of evidence which
could be considered when assessing the implementation of security measures.
 Interviews: In addition to document review, a lot of information may be collected by
interviewing service provider employees. At small providers it may be enough to speak
to one or two persons with commercial and technical responsibility. At large providers,
typical roles to be interviewed are C-level managers (CIO), chief security officers (CSO
or CISO), tactical/operational security officers, NOC managers, internal CERT team,
product managers, and system administrators responsible for critical processes or
systems.
49
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
 System evaluation: Besides documentation, certification, and interviews, the ultimate
check to see if the networks and information systems are secure, and if
policy/procedures are being applied in practice, is by inspecting or testing the system
itself. In some settings system review may be needed, for example to understand how
a security incident could have happened. System evaluation should focus on critical
systems because it can be time-consuming.
5.6.2 Auditor types
Auditing can be carried out by different parties.
 Self-assessment: In self-assessments there is really no auditor, but the personnel of
the provider assesses and reports about compliance. Although self-assessment
reports may be biased, they can provide useful information for providers and
competent authorities. An advantage of self-assessments is that self-assessments are
relatively cheap for providers. Earlier in this document, in Section 5.2, we discuss self-
assessments in more detail.
 Internal auditor: In large organizations, a provider could ask an internal security role
or internal audit department to do an audit of certain systems or parts of the
organization. Compared to self-assessments, an internal auditor may be less biased.
An advantage is that internal auditors often know the organization inside out. Also
internal auditors could more easily leverage the deep knowledge about the network
and information systems at the provider.
 External auditor: An audit report from an external auditor is even less biased. The
only issue here may be that the external auditor may not know all the details about the
organization and/or the network and information systems. This would make the entire
audit more costly, because on the one hand the external auditor would need to
dedicate a lot of time to study the setting and systems at the provider, and the provider
would also need to dedicate a lot of time to providing the necessary information to the
auditor.
 Competent authority as auditor: The competent authority could carry out an audit of
an provider, by using internal staff with auditing expertise, or by outsourcing the
auditing to an auditing firm.
 Certifying auditor: In certification a licensed auditor checks compliance to a specific
standard. The audit report results in a certificate of compliance issued by a certifying
authority. For example it is quite common for large providers to be ISO 27001 certified.
Certification is often refreshed yearly, following a yearly re-audit. Competent authorities
could require certification, and ask providers to submit their certificates as a way to
show compliance39.
 Specialist auditor: In special cases the competent authority may want to designate a
specific auditor, for a specific purpose or following a specific incident. For example, an
competent authority could mandate providers to undergo a security scan of systems by
a security scanning specialist.
 Pool of auditors: The competent authority could designate a pool of external auditors.
Criteria for auditors could be based on past experience (a track record of audits, or
security tests) or be based on examination criteria. For example, competent authorities
could start with a list of licensed auditors40 and offer them a yearly training which
focuses on Article 13a requirements for the sector, in this way creating a pool of
auditors.
39 This may also include a more detailed scope statement (or a Statement of Applicability for ISO 27001).
40 In most countries, for example, there are organizations that license auditors to carry out IT audits.
50
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5.6.3 Audit timing and objectives
The frequency and objectives of auditing varies. We distinguish two types of audits.
 Preventive audits: Preventive audits are usually done at fixed intervals, periodically.
In the case of certification (see above) audits are carried out yearly or bi-yearly.
Preventive audits often do not have a specific scope, however it is good practice to set-
up preventive periodic audits according to a multi-year plan and focus first on certain
(important) issues and only later on other issues in subsequent audits. The frequency
of auditing should take into account that providers may need some time to address
deficiencies found in previous audits.
Example: The competent authority in country H mandates providers to undergo
yearly (preventive) audits by 3rd party auditors. To simplify matters and to reduce
the burden for providers, the competent authority works according to a 3 year
supervision plan, focussing on urgent issues first: In the first year the scope of
audits is restricted to business continuity, natural disasters and power cuts
(measures SM9, SM10, SM21, SM22, SM24). In the second year the focus is on
the storage and retention of customer data. In the third year all security measures
will be audited.
 Post-incident audits: Post-incident auditing by an competent authority is usually done
ad-hoc, depending on the type of incident and the setting. Post-incident audits have a
specific focus – and usually they are aimed at assessing if security measures are in
place to prevent the incident from re-occurring. The audit in this case has a specific
scope (the services affected by the incident, the assets affected) and regards specific
security measures (measures failing during the incident, or measures which could
prevent re-occurrence).
5.7 AUTHORISATIONS CONDITIONS
5.7.1 Authorisations
Member States are allowed to attach general authorisation conditions concerning the security of
public networks. This was already envisaged under the “old rules” (Directive 2009/140/EC) and
is also included in the Annex I of the EECC.
For the sake of clarity, in the next section we highlight those conditions listed in the Annex I of
the EECC that are of particular relevance for the security of networks and services.
5.7.2 Conditions
List of conditions which may be attached to general authorisations, rights of use for radio
spectrum and rights of use for numbering resources are indicated in the Annex I of the EECC
and are grouped in different categories, for general and specific conditions.
Of those conditions, some are specifically and directly related to assuring security of networks
and services, such as:
 In Category A (General conditions which may be attached to a general authorisation):
o Condition 8: Measures designed to ensure compliance with the standards or
specifications referred to in Article 39 (when standards or specifications
referred to are related to information security, e.g. ISO 27001)
51
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
 In Category B (Specific conditions which may be attached to a general authorisation for
the provision of electronic communication networks):
o Condition 4: Maintenance of the integrity of public electronic communications
networks in accordance with this Directive including by conditions to prevent
electromagnetic interference between electronic communications networks or
services in accordance with Directive 2014/30/EU.
o Condition 5: Security of public networks against unauthorised access in
accordance with Directive 2002/58/EC
52
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
6 MAPPING TO
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
The security measures described in this document (see Section 4) have been derived from
existing international network and information security standards. This guideline is not intended
to replace existing standards or frameworks that are used by providers. Providers could map the
standards they use internally to the security measures in Section 4, and in this way show
compliance with Article 40. In this section we give two examples of such a mapping.
5.8 MAPPING SECURITY DOMAINS
Below, as an example, we map the security domains of Section 4 to a number of international
standards frequently used by providers. We map to the following standards:
 ISO 27001:2013, a standard for information security management,
 ISO 27002:2013, a catalogue of information security controls,
 ISO 27036-3:2013, guidelines for information and communication technology supply
chain security,
 ISO 27005:2018, a standard for information security risk management, and
 ISO 22301:2019, a standard for business continuity management.
Security
Addressed in Details
domains
ISO 27001 provides a standard for governance of
information security risks.
ISO 27005 provides a standard for risk management.
ISO 27001 Section A.4 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 5) covers
D1: Governance ISO 27001, Information security policies.
ISO 27002, ISO
and risk 27005 and ISO ISO 27001 Section A.7 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 7) covers
management 27036-3. information security roles and responsibilities.
ISO 27001 Section A.15 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 15)
covers relationships with suppliers.
ISO 27036-3, Part 3 provides guidelines for ICT supply
chain security.
ISO 27001 Section A.7 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 7) covers
D2: Human ISO 27001 background screening, information security roles and
resources
security ISO 27002 responsibilities, security knowledge and training, and
personnel changes.
53
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Security
Addressed in Details
domains
ISO 27001 Section A.11 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 11)
covers physical and environmental security.
ISO 27001 Section A.11 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 9) covers
D3: Security of ISO 27001 access control to information systems and facilities.
systems and
facilities ISO 27002 ISO 27001 Section A.13 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 13)
covers network security.
ISO 27001 Section A.10 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 10)
covers encryption (cryptography)
ISO 27001 Section A.13 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 12)
D4: Operations ISO 27001 covers operational procedures and change management.
management ISO 27002 ISO 27001 Section A.8 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 8) covers
asset management.
D5: Incident ISO 27001 ISO 27001 Section A.16 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 16)
covers management of information security incidents, as
management ISO 27002 well as communications about security events.
ISO 27001 ISO 27001 Section A.11 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 17)
D6: Business covers security aspects of business continuity
continuity ISO 27002 management.
management
ISO 22301 ISO 22301 covers Business Continuity Management.
Monitoring is covered in ISO 27001 Sections A.12 and A.15
D7: Monitoring ISO 27001 (and in ISO 27002 Chapters 12 and 15).
and security Security testing and compliance reviews are covered in
testing ISO 27002 ISO 27001 Sections A.14 and A.18 (and in ISO 27002
Chapters 14 and 18).
User awareness is partially covered in ISO 27001 Section
A.7 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 7)
ISO 27001
Management of technical vulnerabilities is covered in ISO
D8: Threat
ISO 27002 72001 Section A.12.6.1 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 12).
awareness
Contact with special interest groups (e.g. for exchange of
information about threats) is covered in ISO 27001 Section
A.6.1.4 (and ISO 27002 Chapter 6)
We have used ISO standards in this example, but a similar mapping could be made to other
national or international standards. For example, the mapping would look similar if, instead of
ISO 27001 and ISO 27005, we would map to the ITU standards X.1051 (information security
management) and X.1055 (risk management).
54
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
5.9 MAPPING SECURITY OBJECTIVES
One could also make a more detailed mapping. Below, as an example, we map the security
objectives in Section 4 to individual ISO 27002:2013 controls.
Security objectives Controls in ISO 27002:201341
SO1 Information security policy 5.1 Management direction for information security
SO2 Governance and risk ISO 27001, sections 1 to 10 for governance
management
ISO 27001, sections 6.1, 8.2 and 8.3 for risk
management42
SO3 Security roles and 6.1 Internal organization
responsibilities
7.1 Prior to employment
7.2 During employment
7.3 Termination and change of employment
SO4 Security of third-party 13.2.2 Agreements on information transfer
dependencies
13.2.4 Confidentiality or non-disclosure agreements
14.2.7 Outsourced development
15.1: Information security in supplier relationships43
15.2 Supplier service delivery management
SO5 Background checks 7.1 Prior to employment
SO6 Security knowledge and 7.1.2 Terms and conditions of employment
training
7.2.2 Information security awareness, education and
training
7.3 Termination and change of employment
SO7 Personnel changes 7.1.2 Terms and conditions of employment
7.2 During employment
SO8 Handling violations 7.3 Termination and change of employment
SO9 Physical and environmental 11.1 Secure areas
security
11.2 Equipment
SO10 Security of supplies 11.2 Equipment
SO11 Access control to network and 9.1 Business requirements of access control
information systems
9.2 User access management
9.3 User responsibilities
9.4 System and application access control
13.1 Network security management
SO12 Integrity of network and 12.2 Protection from malware
information systems
12.5 Control of operational software
12.6 Technical vulnerability management
13.1 Network security management
SO13 Use of encryption 10.1.1 Policy on the use of cryptographic controls
41 Except for the mapping of ISO 27001:2013 sections to SO2.
42 See also ISO 27005
43 See also ISO 27036-3:2013 - Guidelines for ICT supply chain security
55
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
Security objectives Controls in ISO 27002:201341
SO14 Protection of security critical 10.1.2 Key management
data
SO15 Operational procedures 12.1 Operational procedures and responsibilities
SO16 Change management 12.1 Operational procedures and responsibilities
14.2.2 System change control procedures
14.2.3 Technical review of applications after operating
platform changes
14.2.4 Restrictions on changes to software packages
14.2.9 System acceptance testing
SO17 Asset management 8.1 Responsibility for assets
8.2 Information classification
SO18 Incident management 16.1 Management of information security incidents and
procedures improvements
SO19 Incident detection capability
SO20 Incident reporting and
communication
SO21 Service continuity strategy 17 Information security aspects of Business Continuity
and contingency plans management44
SO22 Disaster recovery capabilities 12.3 Backup
17 Information security aspects of Business Continuity
management45
SO23 Monitoring and logging 12.4 Logging and monitoring
policies
SO24 Exercise contingency plans 17 Information security aspects of Business Continuity
management46
SO25 Network and information 14.2.8 System security testing
systems testing
14.2.9 System acceptance testing
14.3 Test data
18.2 Information security reviews
SO26 Security assessments 12.7 Information systems audit considerations
14.2 Security in development and support processes
18.2 Information security reviews
SO27 Compliance monitoring 12.7 Information systems audit considerations
18.1 Compliance with legal and contractual
requirements
SO28 Threat intelligence 6.1.4 Contact with Special Interest Groups
12.6.1 Management of technical vulnerabilities
SO29 Informing users about threats 7.2.2 Information security awareness, education and
training
44 In addition, ISO 22301 covers Business Continuity Management
45 Ibid.
46 Ibid.
56
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
6. REFERENCES
In this section we provide references to related ENISA papers, and relevant EU legislation. We
also provide a non-exhaustive list of common information security standards we used as input to
earlier drafts of this document.
Related ENISA papers
Document URL
Security Supervision under the EECC, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/supportin
2020 g-the-implementation-of-the-european-electronic-
commmunications-code-eecc
Article 13a Technical Guideline on https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/technical
Security Measures v 2.0 2014 -guideline-on-minimum-security-
measures/at_download/fullReport
Technical guideline on incident https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/technical
reporting -guideline-on-incident-
reporting/at_download/fullReport
Indispensable baseline security https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/indispen
requirements for the procurement of sable-baseline-security-requirements-for-the-
secure ICT products and services procurement-of-secure-ict-products-and-
services/at_download/fullReport
Security Guide for ICT Procurement for https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/security-
electronic communications service guide-for-ict-procurement
providers
Relevant EU Legislation
Document URL
European Electronic Communications https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
Code content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018L1972&
from=E
ePrivacy Directive https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2002/58
EU Cybersecurity Act https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/881/oj
BEREC regulation https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32009R1211
&from=EN
57
GUIDELINE ON SECURITY MEASURES UNDER THE EECC
July 2021
International standards and security best practices
 ISO 27001 “Information security management systems”
 ISO 27002 “Code of practice for information security controls”
 ISO 24762 “Guidelines for inf. and communications technology disaster recovery
services”
 ISO 27005 “Information security risk management”
 ISO 27011 “Information security management guidelines for telecommunications”
 ISO 22301 “Business continuity management systems”
 ITU-T X.1056 (01/2009) “Security incident management guidelines for
telecommunications organizations”
 ITU-T Recommendation X.1051 (02/2008) “Information security management
guidelines for telecommunications organizations based on ISO/IEC 27002”
 ITU-T X.800 (1991) “Security architecture for Open Systems Interconnection for CCITT
applications”
 ITU-T X.805 (10/2003) “Security architecture for systems providing end-to-end
communications”
58
N
N-
E
-
2
2
7
-
0
2
-
4
0
P-
T
ABOUT ENISA
The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, ENISA, is the Union’s agency dedicated to
achieving a high common level of cybersecurity across Europe. Established in 2004 and
strengthened by the EU Cybersecurity Act, the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
contributes to EU cyber policy, enhances the trustworthiness of ICT products, services and
processes with cybersecurity certification schemes, cooperates with Member States and EU
bodies, and helps Europe prepare for the cyber challenges of tomorrow. Through
knowledge sharing, capacity building and awareness raising, the Agency works together
with its key stakeholders to strengthen trust in the connected economy, to boost resilience
of the Union’s infrastructure, and, ultimately, to keep Europe’s society and citizens digitally
secure. More information about ENISA and its work can be found at www.enisa.europa.eu.
ISBN 978-92-9204-457-2
DOI 10.2824/44013