ISO 27001:2022
INFORMATION SECURITY IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
53,000
100
CERTIFICATES TRANSPARENT
GLOBALLY
> ISO 27001:2022
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
2 *UK and IISreOla 2n7d0 o0n1l:y2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
Contents
Introduction to the standard P04
Benefits of implementation P05
Key principles and terminology P06
PDCA cycle P07
Risk based thinking / audits P08
Process based thinking / audit P09
Annex SL P10
SECTION 1: Scope P11
SECTION 2: Normative references P12
SECTION 3: Terms and definitions P13
SECTION 4: Context of the organisation P14
SECTION 5: Leadership P16
SECTION 6: Planning P18
SECTION 7: Support P22
SECTION 8: Operation P24
SECTION 9: Performance evaluation P26
SECTION 10: Improvement P28
Get the most from your management P30
Next steps once implemented P31
Information Security Management Training P32
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 3
INTRODUCTION
TO THE STANDARD
Most businesses hold or have access to valuable or sensitive information. Failure to provide
appropriate protection to such information can have serious operational, financial and legal
consequences. In some instances, these can lead to a total business failure.
The challenge that most businesses struggle with is how to provide appropriate protection. In particular, how
do they ensure that they have identified all the risks they are exposed to and how can they manage them in a
way that is proportionate, sustainable and cost effective?
ISO 27001 is the internationally-recognised standard for Information Security Management Systems (ISMS). It
provides a robust framework to protect information that can be adapted to all types and sizes of organisation.
Organisations that have significant exposure to information-security related risks are increasingly choosing to
implement an ISMS that complies with ISO 27001.
The 27000 Family
Three of the standards are particularly helpful to
The 27000 series of standards started life in 1995 as BS all types of organisations when implementing an
7799 and was written by the UK’s Department of Trade and ISMS. These are:
Industry (DTI). The standards correctly go by the title “ISO/
IEC” because they are developed and maintained jointly by • ISO 27000 Information Technology – Overview
two international standards bodies: ISO (the International and vocabulary
Organisation for Standardisation) and the IEC (the International
Electrotechnical Commission). However, for simplicity, in • ISO 27002 Information technology – Security
everyday usage the “IEC” part is often dropped. techniques – Code of practice for information
security controls. This is the most commonly
referenced, relating to the design and
There are currently 45 published standards in the ISO 27000
implementation of the 93 controls specified in
series. Of these, ISO 27001 is the only standard intended for
Annex A of ISO 27001:2022.
certification. The other standards all provide guidance on best
practice implementation. Some provide guidance on how to
• ISO 27005 Information Technology – Security
develop ISMS for particular industries; others give guidance on
techniques – Information security management.
how to implement key information security risk management
processes and controls.
Regular reviews and updates
ISO standards are subject to review every five years
to assess whether an update is required.
The most recent update to the ISO 27001 standard was in
2022 and brought about significant restructure of Annex SL,
as well as a number of new controls.
44 IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE
BENEFITS OF
IMPLEMENTATION
Information security is now fundamentally important to organisations, and the adoption of
ISO 27001 more common. It’s no longer a question of if they will be affected by a security
breach, it’s a question of when, and how they will respond.
Implementing an Information Security Management System (ISMS) and achieving certification to ISO 27001 is a significant
undertaking. However, if done effectively, there are significant benefits for those organisations that need to protect
valuable or sensitive information. These benefits typically fall into three areas:
COMMERCIAL PEACE OF MIND
Having independent third-party endorsement Many organisations have information that is
of an ISMS can provide an organisation with a mission-critical to their operations, vital to
competitive advantage against its competitors. sustaining their competitive advantage or an
Customers exposed to significant information inherent part of their financial value.
security risks are now making certification to
ISO 27001 a requirement in tender submissions. Having a robust and effective ISMS enables
business owners and managers to sleep easier
Where the customer is also certified to at night, knowing that they are less exposed to a
ISO 27001, they will only choose to work with risk of heavy fines, major business disruption or
suppliers whose information security controls a significant hit to their reputation.
match their own contractual requirements.
ISO 27001 is an internationally recognised
For organisations that want to work with this framework for a best practice ISMS and
type of customer, having an ISO 27001 certified compliance where it can be independently
ISMS is a key requirement for sustaining and verified to both boost an organisation’s image
increasing their commercial revenues. and give confidence to its customers.
OPERATIONAL
Obtaining ISO 27001 supports an internal
culture that is constantly aware of information
security risks, and has a consistent approach
to dealing with them. This leads to controls that
are more robust in dealing with threats. The cost
of implementing and maintaining them is also
minimised, and in the event of these controls
failing, the consequences will be reduced and
more effectively mitigated.
IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE 55
KEY PRINCIPLES
AND TERMINOLOGY
The core purpose of an ISMS is to provide protection for sensitive or valuable information.
Sensitive information typically includes information about employees, customers and suppliers.
Valuable information may include intellectual property, financial data, legal records, commercial
data and operational data.
THE TYPES
OF RISK THAT
TShEeN tSypITeIsV Eo f risks
tAhNatD s eVnAsLiUtivAeB aLnEd
valuable information
INFORMATION
are subject to
ARE SUBJECT TO
can generally be Confidentiality Integrity Availability
gCrAouNp GedE NinEtoR AthLrLeYe
cBaEte GgoRrOieUsP:ED where one or where the content of the where access to the
more people gain information is changed information is lost or
INTO THREE
unauthorised access to so that it is no longer hampered.
CATEGORIES:
information. accurate or complete.
These information security risk types form what is commonly Vulnerabilities such as open office windows, source code
referred to as the CIA triad. misconfigurations, or the location of buildings next to rivers,
increase the likelihood that the presence of a threat will result
Risks in information security typically arise from the presence in an unwanted and costly incident.
of threats and vulnerabilities to assets that process, store,
hold, protect or control access to information that can lead to In information security, risk is managed through the design,
incidents. implementation and maintenance of controls such as locked
windows, software testing, correct configurations, software
Assets in the context of ISO 27001 typically include patching or siting vulnerable equipment above ground level.
information, people, equipment, systems or infrastructure.
An ISMS that complies with ISO 27001 has an interrelated
Information is the data set(s) that an organisation wants to set of best practice processes that support the design,
protect such as employee records, customer records, financial implementation and maintenance of controls, specific to that
records, design data, test data etc. business.
Incidents are unwanted events that result in a loss of The processes that form part of an ISMS are usually a
confidentiality (e.g. a data breach,) integrity (e.g. corruption combination of existing core business processes (e.g.
of data,) or availability (e.g. system failure). recruitment, induction, training, purchasing, product design,
equipment maintenance, service delivery,) and those specific
Threats are what cause incidents to occur and may be
to maintaining and improving information security (e.g. change
malicious (e.g. a cyber-attack,) accidental (e.g. accidental
management, configuration management, access control,
sharing of information to the wrong party,) or a force majeure
incident management, threat intelligence).
(e.g. a flood).
66 IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE
PDCA CYCLE
ISO 27001 is based on the Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle, also known as the Deming
wheel or Shewhart cycle. The PDCA cycle can be applied not only to the management
system as a whole, but also to each individual element to provide an ongoing focus on
continuous improvement.
In brief:
Plan: Do: Check: Act:
Establish objectives, Implement what Monitor and measure Take action to improve
resources required, was planned. processes to establish performance, as
customer and performance against necessary.
stakeholder policies, objectives,
requirements, requirements and
organisational policies planned activities and
and identify risks and report the results.
opportunities.
PDCA model ISO 27001
INFORMATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (4)
ESTABLISH
INTERESTED ISMS INTERESTED
PARTIES PARTIES
Plan Do
MAINTAIN
IMPLEMENT
AND IMPROVE
AND OPERATE
THE ISMS
THE ISMS
INFORMATION Act Check
SECURITY MANAGED
REQUIREMENTS INFORMATION
AND SECURITY
MONITOR
EXPECTATIONS
AND REVIEW
THE ISMS
Plan-Do-Check-Act is an example of a closed-loop system. This ensures the learning from the ‘do’ and ‘check’ stages are
used to inform the ‘act’ and subsequent ‘plan’ stages. In theory this is cyclical, however it’s more of an upward spiral as the
learning moves you on each time you go through the process.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 7
RISK BASED
THINKING/AUDITS
Audits are a systematic, evidence-based, process approach to evaluation of your
Information Security Management System. They are undertaken internally and externally
to verify the effectiveness of the ISMS. Audits are a brilliant example of how risk-based
thinking is adopted within Information Security Management.
First Party Audits To treat the risk, organisations may select and implement
applicable controls from Annex A, as well as implement any
– Internal Audits
other controls outside of this to manage their risks to an
acceptable level. As a result, a Statement of Applicability must
Internal audits are a great opportunity for learning within your be produced and each control from the Annex A must be
organisation. They provide time to focus on a particular process justified whether implemented or not. Risk management is core
or department to truly assess its performance. The purpose of to an ISMS and just as important after asset identification and
an internal audit is to ensure adherence to policies, procedures valuation.
and processes as determined by you, the organisation, and to
confirm compliance with the requirements of ISO 27001. Second Party
– External Audits
Audit Planning
Second party audits are usually carried out by customers or
Devising an audit schedule can sound like a complicated
by others on their behalf, or you may carry them out with your
exercise. Depending on the scale and complexity of your
external providers. Second party audits can also be carried
operations, you may schedule internal audits anywhere from
out by regulators or any other external party that has a formal
every month to once a year. There’s more detail on this in
interest in an organisation.
Section 9 – Performance Evaluation.
You may have little control over the timing and frequency of
Risk-based Thinking
these audits, however establishing your own ISMS will ensure
you are well prepared when they do happen.
The best way to consider frequency of audits is to look at the
risks involved in the process or business that’s being audited. Third Party
Any process that is high risk, either because it has a high
potential to go wrong or because the consequences would be – Certification Audits
severe if it did go wrong, should be audited more frequently
than a low risk process. Third party audits are carried out by UKAS-accredited external
certification bodies such as NQA.
How you assess risk is entirely up to you. ISO 27001 doesn’t
dictate any particular method of risk assessment or risk The certification body will assess conformance to the
management. ISO 27001:2022 standard, where a representative visits
the organisation and assesses the relevant system and its
Organisations must implement a risk assessment methodology
processes. Maintaining certification also involves periodic
and treatment plan with appropriate risk acceptance criteria
reassessments.
and the criteria required to conduct a risk assessment in the
first place. This process must be fully integrated into their Certification demonstrates to customers that you have a
management system. Risks must be prioritised for treatment commitment to quality, safety and the increasing threats to
and treated appropriately. businesses in this digital world.
CERTIFICATION ASSURES:
• Regular assessment to • Credibility that the system • Reduced risk and • Consistency in the
continually monitor and can achieve its intended uncertainty and increase outputs designed to meet
improve processes. outcomes. market opportunities. stakeholder expectations.
8 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
PROCESS BASED
THINKING/AUDIT
A process is the transformation of inputs to outputs, which takes place as a series of
steps or activities which result in the planned objective(s). Often the output of one process
becomes an input to another subsequent process. Very few processes operate in isolation
from any other.
ISO 27001:2022 Fundamentals
“Process: set of interrelated or interacting
activities that uses or transforms inputs to and Vocabulary
deliver a result.”
Understanding how processes interrelate and produce
ISO 27001:2022 Fundamentals and Vocabulary
results can help you to identify opportunities for improvement
and optimise overall performance. This also applies where
A process is the transformation of inputs to outputs, which
processes, or parts of processes, are outsourced.
takes place as a series of steps and result in the planned
objective(s). Often the output of one process becomes an
Understanding how this affects, or could affect the outcome,
input to another subsequent process. Very few processes
and communicating this clearly to the business providing the
operate in isolation from any other.
outsourced service, ensures clarity and accountability in the
process.
Even an audit has a process approach. It begins with
identifying the scope and criteria, establishes a clear course
The final process step is to review the outcome of the audit
of action to achieve the outcome and has a defined output
and ensure the information obtained is put to good use. A
(the audit report). Using the process approach to auditing also
formal management review is the opportunity to reflect on the
ensures the correct time and skills are allocated to the audit.
performance of the ISMS and to make decisions on how and
This makes it an effective evaluation of the performance of the
where to improve. The management review process is covered
ISMS.
in more depth in Section 9 – Performance Evaluation.
“Consistent and predictable results are achieved more
effectively and efficiently when activities are understood and
managed as interrelated processes that function as a coherent
system.”
£
£
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 9
ANNEX SL
ISO 27001 has adopted Annex SL, and this structure is also used for ISO 14001
(Environmental Management System Standard) and ISO 45001 (Health and Safety
Management System Standard).
Prior to the adoption of Annex SL there were many differences
between the clause structures, requirements and terms and
High Level Structure
definitions used across the various management system
standards. This made it difficult for organisations to integrate
the implementation and management of multiple standards;
Annex SL consists of 10 core clauses:
Environment, Quality, Health and Safety and Information
Security being among the most common.
1. Scope
2. Normative references
3. Terms and definitions
4. Context of the organisation
5. Leadership
6. Planning
7. Support
8. Operation
9. Performance evaluation
10. Improvement
Of these clauses, the common terms and core
definitions cannot be changed. Requirements may
not be removed or altered, however discipline-specific
requirements and recommendations may be added.
All management systems require a consideration of
the context of the organisation (more on this in section
4); a set of objectives relevant to the discipline, in this
case quality, and aligned with the strategic direction
of the organisation; a documented policy to support
the management system and its aims; internal audits
and management review. Where multiple management
systems are in place, many of these elements can be
combined to address more than one standard.
10 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
THE 10 CLAUSES OF ISO 27001:2022
ISO 27001 is made of up 10 sections known
as Clauses.
As with most other ISO management system INTERESTED PARTIES
standards, the requirements of ISO 27001 that
need to be satisfied are specified in Clauses
4.0 – 10.0. Unlike most other ISO management
system standards, an organisation must
comply with all of the requirements in
Clauses 4.0 – 10.0. They cannot declare one or
more clauses as being not applicable to them.
In ISO 27001, in addition to Clauses 4.0 - 10.0, THREATS
there is a further set of requirements detailed in
a section called Annex A, which is referenced
in Clause 6.0.
Annex A contains 93 information security
CONTROL
controls. Each of these 93 controls need to
ACCESS
be considered. To be compliant with ISO
27001, the organisation must implement these
ASSETS
controls, or an acceptable justification must be
CONTROLS
given for not implementing a particular control.
The following parts of this guide provide an
overview of each clause, highlight the evidence
an auditor would expect to see to confirm that
CONTINUAL
you comply, and give tips on effective ways to MONITOR
IMPROVEMENT
comply with the requirements.
SECTION 1:
SCOPE
The Scope section of ISO 27001 sets out:
• The purpose of the standard.
• The types of organisations it is designed to apply to; and
• The sections of the standard (called Clauses) that contain
requirements that an organisation needs to comply with for
the organisation to be certified as “conforming” to it (i.e.
being compliant).
ISO 27001 is designed to be applicable to any type of
organisation. Regardless of size, complexity, industry sector,
purpose or maturity, your organisation can implement and
maintain an ISMS that complies with ISO 27001.
IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE 1111
SEITILIBARENLUV
USE VALUE
REGULATE
INFORMATION RISKS
CONFIDENTIALITY
INTEGRITY
AVAILABILITY
SECTION 2:
NORMATIVE
REFERENCES
In ISO standards, the Normative References section lists any other standards that contain
additional information that is relevant to determining whether an organisation complies with
the standard in question. In ISO 27001, only one document is listed: ISO 27000 Information
Technology - Overview and Vocabulary.
Some of the terms and requirements detailed in ISO 27001 are
explained further in ISO 27000. Reference to ISO 27000 is very
useful in understanding a requirement better or identifying the
best way to comply with it.
TIP – External auditors will expect you to have taken the
information contained in ISO 27000 into account in the
development and implementation of your ISMS.
12 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
SECTION 3:
TERMS AND
DEFINITIONS
There are no terms and definitions given in ISO 27001. Instead, reference is made to the
most current version of ISO 27000 Information Security Management Systems – Overview
and Vocabulary. The current version of this document contains 81 definitions of terms that
are used in ISO 27001.
In addition to the terms explained in the “Key
Principles and Terminology” section above, the When you write your Information
most important terms used in ISO 27001 are:
Security Management System
documentation, you don’t have to
Access Controls
use these exact terms. However, it
To ensure that physical and logical access to assets is
authorised and restricted based on business and information does help to clarify the meaning and
security requirements. intention if you can define the terms
you have used. Providing a glossary
Information Asset
within your system documentation may
A body of information, defined and managed as a single unit,
be useful.
so it can be understood, shared, protected and exploited.
Information assets should be identified and its value
established by assigning its value to the organisation, based
on the reputational and/or financial impacts it may cause if
compromised. Alongside ‘Risk’ are two other fundamental
components of ISO 27001, and these are:
Risk
Continual improvement (CI)
A combination of the likelihood of an information security event
occurring and the resulting consequences. The idea that small, ongoing and well-calculated changes
can lead to major improvements over time. In ISO, CI refers to
Risk Assessment the company’s effort to constantly improve its management
system to meet ISO standard requirements.
The process of identifying risks, analysing the level of risk
posed by each risk and evaluating whether additional action is
needed to reduce each risk to a more acceptable level.
Risk Treatment
Processes or actions that reduce identified risks to an
acceptable level.
Top Management
The group of individuals who are the most senior decision
makers in an organisation. They are likely to be accountable
for setting its strategic direction, and for determining and
achieving stakeholder objectives.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 13
SECTION 4:
CONTEXT OF THE
ORGANISATIONS
The purpose of your ISMS is to protect your organisation’s Information Assets, so the
organisation can achieve its goals.
• Consistency: Do you have uniform processes in place
How you go about this and the specific areas of priority will across the organisation, or a multitude of different operating
be driven by the context your organisation operates practices with little consistency?
in, both: • Systems: Does your organisation have many legacy
systems running on software versions that are no longer
• Internally – the things that the organisation has some
supported by the manufacturer, or do you maintain the most
control.
up-to-date and best available technology?
• Externally – the things that the organisation has no
• Where does your infrastructure reside? Are you operating in
direct control.
the cloud, or do you have your own infrastructure onsite?
A careful analysis of the environment your organisation • System complexity: Do you operate one main system that
operates in is fundamental to identifying the inherent does all the heavy lifting, or multiple departmental systems
risks posed to the security of your Information Assets. with limited information transfer between them?
The analysis is the foundation that will enable you to • Physical space: Do you have a dedicated secure office
assess what processes you need to consider adding or facility, or do you operate in a space shared with other
strengthening to build an effective ISMS. organisations, or are you a remote first/only organisation?
Internal Context External Context
The following are examples of the areas that can be The following are examples of the areas that can be
considered when assessing the internal issues that may have a considered when assessing the external issues that may have
bearing on the ISMS risks: a bearing on the ISMS risks:
• Maturity: Are you an agile start-up with a blank canvas to • Competition: Do you operate in a rapidly changing and
work on, or a 30+ year old institution with well-established innovative market, requiring many system upgrades to
processes and security controls? stay competitive, or in a mature, stable market with little
• Organisation culture: Is your organisation relaxed innovation year-to-year?
about how, when and where people work, or extremely • Landlord: Do you need approval to upgrade physical
regimented? Might the culture resist the implementation of security?
Information Security controls? • Regulators/enforcement bodies: Is there a requirement in
• Management: Are there clear communication channels your sector to make regular statutory changes, or is there
and processes from the organisation’s key decision makers little oversight from regulators in your market sector?
through to the rest of the organisation? • Economic/political: Do currency fluctuations impact your
• Resource size: Are you working with an Information Security organisation? How do geopolitical situations impact your
Team, or is one person doing it all? organisation?
• Resource maturity: Are the available resources (employees/ • Environmental considerations: Is your site on a flood plain
contractors) knowledgeable, fully trained, dependable and with the server(s) located in a basement? Are there factors
consistent, or are personnel inexperienced and constantly making your site(s) a possible target for a break-in or a
changing? terrorist attack (e.g. in a prominent city centre location or
• Information asset formats: Are your information assets next to a possible target)?
mainly stored in hard-copy (paper) format, or are they stored • Prevalence of information security attacks: Does your
electronically on a server on-site, or in remote cloud-based organisation operate in a sector that regularly attracts
systems? interest from hackers (criminals, hacktivists)?
• Information asset sensitivity/value: Does your organisation • Shareholders: Are they very concerned about the
have to manage highly valuable or particularly sensitive vulnerability of the organisation to data breaches? How
information assets? concerned are they about the cost of the organisation’s
efforts to improve its information security?
14 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
Interested Parties
An interested party is anyone who is, can be, or perceives
themselves to be affected by an action or omission of your
organisation. Your interested parties will become clear through
the process of carrying out a thorough analysis of internal and
external issues.
They will probably include shareholders, landlords, regulators,
customers, employees and competitors. They may extend to
the general public and the environment, depending on the
nature of your business. You don’t have to try to understand or
satisfy their every whim, but you do have to determine which of
their needs and expectations are relevant to your ISMS.
Scope of the
Management System
To comply with ISO 27001, you must document the scope of
your ISMS. Documented scopes typically describe:
• The boundaries of the physical site or sites included (or not
included).
• The boundaries of the physical and logical networks New consideration for
included (or not included).
• The internal and external employee groups included (or not climate change
included).
• The internal and external processes, activities or services ISO has made changes to ISO 27001 to emphasise the
included (or not included). importance of addressing the effects of climate change
• Key interfaces at the boundaries of the scope. within the framework of organisational management
systems.
If you want to prioritise resources by building an ISMS that
doesn’t cover all of your organisation, selecting a scope that To enhance organisational awareness and response
is limited to managing key stakeholder interests is a pragmatic to climate change, ISO has introduced two critical
approach. This can be done by including only specific sites, changes within Clause 4:
assets, processes and business units or departments. Some
examples of scope statements:
Original Clause 4.1:
“Understanding the organisation and its context. The
• “All operations carried out by the IT Department”.
organisation shall determine external and internal
• “Support and management of email”.
issues that are relevant to its purpose and that affect
• “All equipment, systems, data and infrastructure in the
its ability to achieve the intended result(s) of its XXX
organisation’s data centre based at the
management system.”
Basingstoke site”.
TIP: Document or maintain a file of all of the information
collated in your analysis of your organisation’s context and This clause now explicitly includes the
interested parties such as: statement: “The organisation shall determine
whether climate change is a relevant issue.”
• Discussions with a senior representative of the organisation,
e.g. an MD, CEO or CTO.
• Minutes of meetings or business plans.
• A specific document that identifies internal/external issues Original Clause 4.2:
and interested parties and their needs and expectations e.g. “Understanding the needs and expectations of
a SWOT analysis, PESTLE study, or high-level business risk interested parties. The organisation shall determine:
assessment.
• The interested parties that are relevant to the XXX
management system.
• The relevant requirements of these interested parties.
• Which of these requirements will be addressed
through the XXX management system.”
The clause now also states: “Note: Relevant
interested parties can have requirements
related to climate change.”
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 15
SECTION 5:
LEADERSHIP
The Importance of Leadership
Leadership in this context means active • Clarity on responsibilities and ISO 27001 places great importance
involvement in setting the direction of accountabilities. on active engagement by Top
the ISMS, promoting its implementation • Risk-based thinking is at the heart of Management in the ISMS, based on
and ensuring appropriate resources are all decision making. the assumption that the engagement of
made available. This includes: • Clear communication of this Top Management is crucial in ensuring
information to all individuals within the effective implementation and
• Ensuring that the ISMS objectives
your ISMS scope. maintenance of an effective ISMS by
are clear and aligned with overall
the wider employee group.
strategy.
Information Security Policy Roles and Responsibilities
A vital responsibility of the leadership is to establish and For Information Security activities to form part of the day-to-
document an Information Security Policy (ISP) that is aligned day activities for most people within the organisation, the
with the key aims of the organisation. At the top level, it must responsibilities and accountabilities must be defined and
either include objectives or a framework for setting them. To clearly communicated.
demonstrate that it’s aligned with your organisation’s context
and the requirements of key stakeholders, it is recommended Although there is no requirement in the standard for a
that it makes reference to, or contains a summary of, the nominated Information Security representative, it may be
principal issues and requirements it is designed to manage. It helpful for some organisations to appoint one to lead an
must also include a commitment to: information security team to coordinate training, monitoring
controls and reporting on the performance of the ISMS
• Satisfying applicable requirements relating to Information to the Top Management. This individual may already hold
Security, such as legal requirements, customer expectations responsibility for data protection or IT services.
and contractual commitments.
• The continual improvement of your ISMS. However, to carry out their role effectively they will ideally be a
member of the Top Management team and either have a strong
The ISP may refer to, or include sub-policies that cover, the key technical knowledge of information security management or
controls of the organisation’s ISMS. access to individuals who do.
Examples include: the selection of suppliers critical to
Evidencing Leadership to
Information Security, the recruitment and training of
employees, clear desk and clear screen, cryptographic an Auditor
controls, access controls etc.
The Top Management will be the individual or group of
To demonstrate the importance of the ISP, it is advisable
individuals who set the strategic direction and approve
that it is authorised by the most senior member of your Top
resource allocation for the organisation or business area
Management or each member of the Top Management team.
with your ISMS scope. Depending on how your organisation
is structured, these individuals may be the day-to-day
TIP: To ensure your ISP is well communicated and available to
management team. An auditor will typically test leadership by
interested parties, it is a good idea to:
interview, and assess their level of involvement in the:
• Include it in induction packs and presentations for new
• Evaluation of risks and opportunities.
employees and contractors.
• Establishment and communication of policies.
• Post the key statement on internal noticeboards, intranets
• Setting and communication of objectives.
and your organisation’s website.
• Review and communication of system performance.
• Make compliance with it and/or support for it a contractual
• Allocation of appropriate resources, accountabilities and
requirement for employees, contractors and information
responsibilities.
security-critical suppliers.
TIP: Before your external audit, identify who from Top
Management will meet the external auditor. Prepare them with
a mock interview that includes questions you expect them to
be asked.
16 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE 1177
SECTION 6:
PLAN
ACT DO
PLANNING
CHECK
ISO 27001 is fundamentally a risk management tool that steers an organisation to identify the drivers of its
information security risks. As such, the purpose of an ISMS is to:
• Identify the strategically important, blatantly obvious, and hidden but dangerous risks.
• Ensure that an organisation’s day-to-day activities and operating processes are designed, directed
and resourced to inherently manage those risks.
• Automatically respond and adapt to changes to cope with new risks and continually reduce the
organisation’s risk exposure.
Having a detailed action plan that is aligned monitored and supported by regular reviews is crucial, and provides
the best evidence to the auditor of clearly defined system planning.
Risk Assessment
ISO 27005 – Information security risk
Risk assessment is at the core of any effective management offers guidance on developing
ISMS. Even the most well-resourced organisation a risk assessment technique for your
cannot eliminate the possibility of an information organisation. Whichever technique you
security incident occurring. For all organisations, risk select or develop, it should include the
assessment is essential to: following elements:
• Increase the likelihood of identifying all potential risks
1 Provide a prompt for systematic identification of
through the involvement of key individuals using
risks (e.g. reviewing assets, groups of assets,
systematic assessment techniques.
processes, types of information) one at a time,
• Allocate resources to tackle the highest priority areas.
checking each for the presence of common
• Make strategic decisions on how to manage risks that
threats and vulnerabilities, and recording the
will more likely realise their objectives.
controls you currently have in place to manage
them.
Most risk assessment frameworks consist of a
table containing the results of elements 1-4 with a
2 Provide a framework for assessing the likelihood
supplementary table or matrix covering point 5.
of each risk occurring on a consistent basis (e.g.
An external auditor will expect to see a record of your risk once a month, once a year).
assessment, an assigned owner for each risk identified
and the criteria you have used. 3 Provide a framework for assessing the
consequences of each risk occurring on a
TIP: Annex A (5.9) contains a requirement to maintain consistent basis (e.g. £1,000 loss, £100,000
a list of information assets, assets associated with loss).
information (e.g. buildings, filing cabinets, laptops,
licenses) and information processing facilities. If you 4 Provide a framework for scoring or categorising
complete your risk assessment by systematically each risk identified on a consistent basis (e.g.
assessing the risks posed to every item on this list, then 1-10, high/medium/low,) taking into account your
you will have satisfied two requirements within the same assessment of the likelihood and consequences.
exercise.
5 Set out documented criteria that specifies for
each risk score or category, what type of action
needs to be taken and the level or priority
assigned to it.
18 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
Risk Treatment
Information Security
For each risk identified in your risk assessment, you must apply
Objectives and Planning to
consistent criteria to determine whether you should:
• Accept the risk, or Achieve Them
• Treat the risk (called “Risk Treatment”).
At relevant levels within your organisation, you need
The Risk Treatment options available are normally one of the
to have a documented set of information security-
following:
related objectives. These can be at a top level and
• Avoidance – Stop undertaking the activity or processing the apply organisation-wide (e.g. “achieve ISO 27001
information that is exposed to the risk. certification”) or departmental (e.g. “complete
• Removal – Eliminate the source of the risk. Information Security Briefings for all new starters within
• Change the likelihood – Implement a control that makes it less one week of their start date”).
likely that an information security incident will occur.
• Change the consequences – Implement a control that will lessen Each objective you set must be:
the impact if an incident occurs.
• Transfer the risk – Outsource the activity or process to a third • Measurable.
party that has greater capability to manage the risk. •A ligned with your ISP.
• Accept the risk – If there is no practical risk treatment available to •T ake account of the organisation’s information
the organisation, or the cost of the risk treatment is judged to be security requirements.
greater than the cost of the impact, you may make an informed •T ake account of the output from the risk assessment
decision to accept the risk. This would need to be approved by and risk treatment process.
Top Management.
Typical objectives that are relevant to
An external auditor will expect to see a Risk Treatment Plan (e.g.
information security include:
an action list) that details the risk treatment actions you have
implemented or plan to implement. The plan must be sufficiently •R esponding, containing and eradicating the effects of
detailed to enable the implementation status of each action to be information security incidents within a set amount of
verified. There will also need to be evidence that this plan has been time, to reduce the impact and effects of the incident.
approved by the assigned risk owners and Top Management. •A chieving a measurable level of compliance with
information security controls.
Annex A and the Statement of
•P roviding a defined availability of information
Applicability services.
•N ot exceeding a measurable number of data errors.
•M aking improvements to available resources through
All Risk Treatment options (except for “acceptance”) involve the
recruitment, training or acquisition.
implementation of one or more controls. Annex A to ISO 27001
•I mplementation of new controls.
contains a list of 93 best practice information security controls. You
•A chieving compliance with information security-
will need to consider whether to implement each of these controls
related standards.
when formulating your Risk Treatment Plan.
Each objective must be communicated to relevant
The description of most of the 93 controls is fairly vague, so it is
staff. The objectives must be updated when necessary
strongly recommended that you review ISO 27002 which contains
to keep them relevant and to assess performance
more information on the best ways of implementing them.
against them.
As evidence of completing this assessment, an external auditor will
expect you to produce a document called a Statement of Applicability For each of the objectives you need to
(SoA). Within this, for each of the 93 controls you must record: plan how you are going to achieve them.
• Whether it is applicable to your activities, processes and This includes determining:
information security risks.
• Whether you have implemented it or not. •W hat needs to be achieved.
• Justifications for inclusion or exclusion of the control. •W hat resources are assigned.
•W ho has ownership or primary responsibility for
For most organisations, the majority of the 93 controls will be delivering against the objective.
applicable, and they are likely to have already implemented a •W hether there is a target date for completion or just
number of them to some degree. an ongoing requirement.
•T he method of assessing performance against the
TIP: Your Statement of Applicability (SoA) doesn’t need to be
objective (i.e. what is your measure).
a complex document. A simple table with the following column
•R ecording the results.
headings will suffice:
• Control • Applicable? • Implemented? • Justification TIP: Effective ways to communicate information
security objectives include covering them in induction
It is also advisable to record some information on how the control
training, setting them as employee objectives or
has been applied (e.g. reference a procedure or policy,) to help you
including them in employee appraisals, establishing
more readily answer any questioning from your external auditor.
them in SLAs with suppliers, or evaluating
TIP: Whilst not mandated you may wish to include attributes within performance against them in supplier performance
your risk assessment and or SoA. These may help you record and reviews.
retrieve business information to drive risk-based decision making.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 19
ISO 27001
A Guide to Annex A
ISO 27001:2022 is the international standard which outlines best practice for an Information Security
Management System (ISMS). If you are familiar with our previous implementation guide, then you will
have already examined the clauses contained in the standard. You would have also learned that this
standard follows a risk-based approach when considering the information security of an organisation.
This requires the identification of security risks and then the selection of appropriate controls to
reduce, eliminate or manage those risks.
The standard has the controls required to meet those risk requirements at Annex A. In total there are 93 controls
sub-divided into four different control groups. When considering these controls, it is important to note that they
are simply possibilities or options.
When conducting the risk process, the risk identified should have appropriate controls that have been selected
from the list in Annex A. Not every control can be implemented. For example, if your organisation does not
have premises and operates remotely, using some controls from the physical security domain would not be
appropriate.
Similarly, the move to cloud-based solutions requires a fresh look at existing controls within the Operations and
Communications Security domains.
Categories of Controls
ORGANISATIONAL PEOPLE PHYSICAL TECHNOLOGICAL
CONTROLS CONTROLS CONTROLS CONTROLS
20 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
Further Considerations
Before the certification audit, an organisation must and can be held as separate documentation.
have produced a Statement of Applicability (SoA). The methodology will vary between different
organisations, though demonstrating that the
This requirement is outlined at Clause 6 of ISO controls within Annex A are implemented is a
27001. The SoA must contain at least 93 entries consistent need.
with each of the Categories and Controls listed.
Once this is done, each control must be either The security provisions of the standard are not
selected and justified or excluded with similar something that an organisation’s IT or Security
justification. All SoA documents must be able to Team must adhere to alone. The standard requires
demonstrate that consideration has been given to that all aspects of the organisation be considered
each control. This means that an SoA must contain when examining the risks and treatment of risk.
all entries outlined. Simply listing selected controls
will not meet the requirement. The best-placed individuals to remedy and risk
issues may not always be in the IT Department.
The controls that are selected will form part of the The exact siting of risk treatment will vary from one
risk treatment evidence and should be recorded. organisation to the other. Risk ownership is vital in
Typically this will be held within a risk register ensuring the controls are subject to review.
Finally
Annex A controls are just some of the options available to an organisation. Additional security controls not
specifically outlined in Annex A can be used to provide treatment to an identified risk. So long as the clauses
and controls within the standard are addressed as appropriate, the ISMS will be functioning and provide good
levels of information security.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 21
SECTION 7:
SUPPORT
Clause 7 concerns itself with resources. This applies to people, infrastructure and
environment as much as physical resources, materials, tools etc. There is also a renewed
focus on knowledge as a significant resource within your organisation. When planning your
quality objectives, a major consideration will be the current capacity and capability of your
resources as well as those you may need to source from external suppliers/partners.
Awareness
To implement and maintain an
In addition to ensuring specific competence of key personnel
effective ISMS you need to have
in relation to information security, the wider group of
supporting resources in place. These employees, suppliers and contractors will need to be aware of
the basic elements of your ISMS. This is central to establishing
resources will need to be:
a supportive culture within the organisation.
• C apable – If they are equipment or
All staff, suppliers and contractors should be aware of the
infrastructure.
following:
• C ompetent – If they are people.
• I ncluded in management review • That you have an ISMS and why you have one.
• That you have an Information Security Policy and which
meetings.
particular elements of the policy are relevant to them.
• How they can contribute to protecting valuable information
and what they need to do to help the organisation achieve its
objectives.
Competence
• Which policies, procedures and controls are relevant to them
and what the consequences are of not complying with them.
The implementation of effective information security controls
relies heavily on the knowledge and skills of your employees, TIP: The communication of this information can normally be
suppliers and contractors. To be certain of an appropriate done through existing processes and documents such as
knowledge and skills base you need to: inductions, employment contracts, toolbox talks, supplier
agreements, employee briefings or updates.
• Define what knowledge and skills are required.
• Determine who needs to have the knowledge and skills. Communication
• Set out how you can assess or verify that the right people
have the right knowledge and skills. To enable the processes in your ISMS to work effectively you
will need to ensure you have communication activities that are
Your auditor will expect you to have documents detailing
well planned and managed. ISO 27001 details these concisely
your knowledge and skills requirements. Where you believe
by requiring you to determine:
the requirements are satisfied, this will need to be supported
with records such as training certificates, course attendance • What needs to be communicated.
records or internal competency assessments. • When it needs to be communicated.
• Who needs be included in communications.
TIP: Most organisations that already use tools such as training/
• What the processes is for communication.
skills matrices, appraisals or supplier assessments can satisfy
the requirement for competence records by expanding the TIP: If your communication requirements are well defined in
areas covered to include information security. your processes, policies and procedures, then you do not
need to do any more to satisfy this requirement. If they aren’t
sufficient, then you should consider documenting your key
communication activities in the form of a table or procedure
that includes the headings detailed above.
Remember, the content of these documents also needs to be
communicated.
22 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
Documented Information
To be of use, the documented information you use to The source of your documented information may be either
implement and maintain your ISMS needs to be: internal or external, so your control processes need to manage
documented information from both sources.
• Accurate.
• Understandable to the individuals who use it. TIP: Organisations that have good document control typically
• Supportive to comply with legal requirements, manage have one or more of the following in place:
information security risks and achieve your objectives.
• A single person or small team responsible for ensuring
So that your documented information always satisfies these that new/modified documents are reviewed before they are
requirements you will need to have processes in place to issued, are stored in the right location, are withdrawn from
ensure that: circulation when superseded and that a register of changes
is maintained.
• Documented information is reviewed where required by
• An electronic document management system that contains
appropriate individuals before it is released into general
automatic workflows and controls.
circulation.
• Robust electronic data back-up and hard-copy file archiving/
• Access to documented information is controlled so that
storage processes.
it cannot be changed accidentally, corrupted, deleted or
• Strong employee awareness of document control, record
accessed by individuals to whom it is not appropriate.
keeping and information access/retention requirements.
• Information is deleted securely or returned to its owner when
there is a requirement to do this.
• You can track changes to information to guarantee that the
process is in control.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 23
SECTION 8:
PLAN
ACT DO
OPERATION
CHECK
So, after all the planning and risk assessment, we’re ready to move on to the “do” stage.
Clause 8 is all about having appropriate control over the creation and delivery of your
product or service.
Managing your information security risks and achieving your Information Security Risk
objectives requires the formalisation of your activities into a set
Assessment
of clear and coherent processes.
Many of these processes are likely to exist already (e.g. The risk assessment methods and techniques described in
induction and training,) and will simply need modifying to Clause 6 must be applied to all processes, assets, information
include elements relevant to information security. Other and activities within the organisation’s ISMS scope.
processes may happen in an ad-hoc fashion (e.g. supplier
approvals,) while some may not currently exist at all (e.g. Since risks are not static, the results of these assessments
internal audit). must be reviewed at appropriate frequencies. This is usually at
least annually, or more frequently if the assessment identifies
To implement effective processes the following the presence of one or more significant risks. Risks should also
practices are crucial: be reviewed whenever:
• Any Risk Treatment actions are completed (see below).
1 Processes are created by adapting or formalising an • There are changes to the organisation’s assets, information
organisation’s “business as usual” activities. or processes.
• New risks are identified.
• Experience or new information indicates that the likelihood
2 Systematic identification of the information security risks
and consequence of any identified risk has changed.
relevant to each process.
TIP: To ensure your risk assessment process covers the types
3 Clear definition and communication of the set of activities of events that would require a review, you should also take
required to manage the associated information security into consideration the Annex A controls for Threat Intelligence
risks when an event occurs (e.g. a new employee joining (5.7), Management of Technical Vulnerabilities (8.8), Secure
the company). Development lifecycle (8.25) and Monitoring, review and
change of supplier services (5.22).
4 Clear assignment of the responsibilities for carrying out Information Security Risk
related activities.
Treatment
5 Adequate allocation of resources to ensure that related
The risk treatment plan you develop cannot simply remain as a
activities can take place as and when required.
statement of intent - it must be implemented. Where changes
are needed to take into account new information about risks
6 Routine assessment of the consistency with which each and changes to your risk assessment criteria, the plan needs
process is followed and its effectiveness in managing to be updated and re-authorised.
relevant information security risks.
The impact of the plan must also be assessed, and the results
TIP: For each process, designate an individual to be of this assessment recorded. This may be done as part of your
accountable for ensuring that steps 2-6 happen. This individual management review or internal audit processes, or by using
is often referred to as the Process Owner. technical assessments such as network penetration tests,
supplier audits or unannounced third party audits.
24 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE 2255
SECTION 9:
PLAN
PERFORMANCE
ACT DO
CHECK
EVALUATION
Internal Audits
There are three main ways in which the
The purpose of internal audits is to test your ISMS processes
performance of an ISMS is evaluated.
for weaknesses and identify opportunities for improvement.
These are:
They are also an opportunity to provide a reality check to
Top Management on how strongly the ISMS is performing.
• M onitoring the effectiveness of the
When done well, internal audits can ensure that there are no
ISMS controls.
surprises at your external audits.
• T hrough internal audits.
• M anagement Review meetings.
The internal audits you perform should check:
• How consistently processes, procedures and controls are
followed and applied.
Monitoring, Measurement, • How successful your processes, procedures and controls
are at generating the intended results.
Analysis and Evaluation
• Whether your ISMS remains compliant with ISO 27001 and
the requirements of interested parties.
Your organisation will need to decide what needs to be
monitored to be assured that your ISMS process and To ensure that audits are undertaken to a high standard
information security controls are operating as intended. and in a way that is seen to add value, they need to be
It is impractical for an organisation to manually monitor undertaken by individuals who are:
everything all the time. If you attempt to do so, it is likely that
• Respected.
the volume of data would be so great that it would be virtually
• Competent.
impossible to use it effectively. Therefore, you will need to take
• Familiar with the requirements of ISO 27001.
an informed decision about what to monitor. The following
• Able to interpret your documentation and are well-practiced
considerations will be important:
in sound auditing techniques and behaviours.
• Which processes and activities are subject to the most
Most importantly, they need to be allocated sufficient time
frequent and significant threats?
to complete the audit and be assured of cooperation from
• Which processes and activities have the most significant,
relevant employees. You must maintain a plan for carrying
inherent vulnerabilities?
out your internal audits. An external auditor will expect this
• What is practical to monitor and generate meaningful and
plan to ensure that all of your ISMS processes are audited
timely information from?
over a three-year cycle and have processes that:
• Are you automating your monitoring?
• With each monitoring process you put in place, for it to be
• Show evidence of poor performance (i.e. through previous
effective you must clearly define:
audits, or monitoring results or information security
- How the monitoring is undertaken (e.g. is this defined in a
incidents).
procedure).
• Manage the most significant information security risks.
- When it is undertaken.
• Are audited at a higher frequency.
- Who is responsible for undertaking it.
- How are the results reported, when, to whom and what do The external auditor will also expect that any actions identified
they do with them. from audits are recorded, reviewed by appropriate employees
- If the monitoring results identify unacceptable and actions implemented in a timely manner to rectify any
performance, what is the escalation process or procedure significant issues. They should make an allowance in the
to deal with this situation. close-out time for any improvement opportunities identified
that require significant investment in resources.
To demonstrate to an auditor that you have appropriate
monitoring processing in place, you will need to retain records
of monitoring results, analysis, evaluation reviews and any
escalation activities.
26 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
Management Review
Management review is an essential element of an ISMS. It You will need to retain documented information on your
is the formal point at which Top Management reviews the management reviews. These would normally be minutes
effectiveness of the ISMS and ensures its alignment to the of meetings or perhaps call recordings if you carry out
organisation’s strategic direction. Management reviews conference calls. These do not need to be extensive notes, but
must take place at planned intervals and the overall review they must contain a record of any decisions made and actions
programme (i.e. one meeting or several meetings) must at a agreed, ideally with responsibilities and timescales.
minimum cover a list of core areas specified within clause 9.3
TIP: If you decide to adapt your existing schedule of
of the standard.
management meetings and these meetings cover a number of
It is not essential for one single management review meeting to areas, you may want to consider summarising the areas that
take place covering the full agenda. these meetings cover in the form of a table or procedure so
that it is clear to you and an auditor which meetings cover each
If you currently hold a range of meetings that cover the inputs of the required review areas.
between them, there is no specific need to duplicate them.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 27
SECTION 10:
PLAN
ACT DO
IMPROVEMENT
CHECK
The key aim of implementing an ISMS should be to reduce the likelihood of information
security events occurring and their impact. No ISMS is likely to be perfect. However, a
successful ISMS will improve over time and increase the organisation’s resilience to
information security attacks.
Nonconformity and
Corrective Action Root cause analysis
One of the main drivers of improvement is to learn from To identify effective corrective action, it is strongly
security incidents, issues identified in audits, performance advisable to complete a root cause analysis of the
issues identified from monitoring, complaints from interested issue that occurred. If you don’t get to the bottom of
parties and ideas generated at management reviews. why or how it happened, then it is likely that whatever
fix you implement will not be fully effective. A simple
For each learning opportunity identified you must maintain a approach such as “Five Whys” is a good root cause
record of: analysis tool: start with the issue, then ask “Why”
enough times to reach the root cause. Usually five
• What occurred.
times of asking is enough, but for more complex
• If the event had undesirable consequences, what action was
problems you may need to dig deeper.
taken to contain and mitigate those.
• The root cause of the event (if determined). For example:
• The action taken to eliminate the root cause (if needed).
• An assessment of the effectiveness of any action taken. Problem statement:
• A trend analysis of similar findings can help your business, The organisation was infected by the Wannacry
but is not a requirement. virus.
Why?
Someone clicked on an email link, it downloaded
the virus and infected their PC.
Why?
They had not received any training in clicking on
links in emails that they are not expecting to receive.
Why?
The training manager is on maternity leave and the
organisation has not implemented cover for them.
Why?
The maternity leave process is not covered in the
Change Management Procedure and so a risk
assessment was not completed to identify any
information security risks.
TIP: You may not have sufficient resources to
undertake root cause analysis for every event. To
prioritise your efforts, you should consider first
completing a simple risk assessment of an event and
then undertake root cause analysis only for those that
are medium or high risk.
28 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE 2299
GET THE MOST
FROM YOUR
MANAGEMENT
SYSTEMS
Top tips for the successful implementation of an ISMS
1. Start with “Why?” Make sure the reasons 6. Keep your processes and supporting
for implementing an ISMS are clear and documentation simple. It can develop
aligned with your strategic direction, to become more extensive over time if
otherwise you risk not getting the critical needed.
buy-in from Top Management.
7. Design and implement rules you
2. Consider “What for?” Implementing and can follow in practice. Don’t make
maintaining an ISMS requires significant the mistake of documenting an over-
commitment, so make sure your scope elaborate rule that no-one can follow. It
is broad enough to cover the critical is better to accept a risk and to continue
information that needs protecting, but to look for ways to manage it.
is not so broad that you do not have
sufficient resources to implement and 8. Remember your suppliers. Some
maintain it. suppliers will help you enhance your
ISMS, some will increase your risk. You
3. Get all your key stakeholders involved at need to ensure any high-risk suppliers
the appropriate times. Top Management have controls in place that are at least
for context, requirements, policy and as good as yours. If they don’t then look
objectives setting; managers and for alternatives.
employees with valuable knowledge for
risk assessments, process design and 9. Train, train and train again. Information
procedure writing. security is likely to be a new concept for
most of your employees. People may
4. Communicate extensively throughout need to change habits ingrained over
the process to all your stakeholders. many years. A single awareness briefing
Let them know what you are doing, is unlikely to be sufficient.
why you’re doing it, how you plan to
do it and what their involvement will be. 10. Remember to allocate sufficient
Provide regular progress updates. resources to routinely test your controls.
The threats your organisation faces will
5. Get external help. Do not fail for constantly change and you need to
lack of in-house technical skills or test whether you are able to respond to
knowledge. Management of information those threats.
security risks often requires specialist
knowledge. However, be sure to check
the credentials of a third party before
engaging them.
3300 IISSOO 2277000011::22002222 IIMMPPLLEEMMEENNTTAATTIIOONN GGUUIIDDEE
NEXT STEPS ONCE
IMPLEMENTED
AWARENESS TRAINING INTERNAL AUDIT
• Your organisation should raise awareness about • A robust internal audit system for the organisation is
various standards covered under IMS. essential. Internal Auditor Training is recommended
and NQA can provide Internal Auditor Training for the
1 • You should hold separate training meetings for top 6 standard(s) that you are implementing.
management, middle management and junior level
management, which will help to create a motivating • It is important to implement corrective actions for
environment, ready for implementation. improvements, in each of the audited documents, in
order to bridge gaps and ensure effectiveness of IMS.
POLICY AND OBJECTIVES ORGANISE A MANAGEMENT ‘SYSTEM’
REVIEW MEETING
• Your organisation should develop an Integrated
Quality Policy/Environment Policy/Health & Safety • Top level management must review various official
Policy/Information Security Policy and relevant business aspects of the organisation, which are
2 objectives to help meet the requirements. 7 relevant to the standards being implemented.
• By working with top level management your company • Review the policy, objectives, results of internal
should hold workshops with all levels of management audit, results of process performance, results of
staff to outline the integrated objectives. complaints/feedback/legal compliance, results of risk
assessment/incidents and develop an action plan
following the meeting - which must be minuted.
INTERNAL GAP ANALYSIS THOROUGH GAP ANALYSIS OF
IMPLEMENTED SYSTEMS
• Your organisation should identify and compare the
level of compliance of existing systems against • A formal pre-certification gap analysis should be
requirements of the standards under your new IMS. conducted to assess effectiveness and compliance of
3 8
system implementation in the organisation.
• Relevant staff should all understand the operations of
the organisation and develop a process map for the • This final gap analysis will prepare your organisation
activities within the business. for the final certification audit.
DOCUMENTATION / PROCESS DESIGN CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
• The organisation should create documentation • The organisation should be ready for final
of the processes as per requirements of relevant certification audit, providing that the gap analysis
standard(s). audit conducted in the last step and all the non-
4 9 conformities (NC) have been assigned corrective
• You should write and implement a manual, functional actions.
procedures booklet, work instructions, system
procedures and provide associated terms. • Check that all the significant NCs are closed and the
organisation is ready for the final certification audit.
DOCUMENTATION / PROCESS FINAL CERTIFICATION AUDIT
IMPLEMENTATION
• Once completed, your organisation is hopefully
• Processes / Documents developed in step 4, should recommended for registration to the required
be implemented across the organisation covering all standard.
5 10
the departments and activities.
• CONGRATULATIONS!
• The organisation should hold a workshop on
the implementation as per applicable for the ISO
standard requirements.
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 31
INFORMATION
SECURITY
MANAGEMENT
TRAINING
Develop your skills to implement and audit your information security management system to
minimise your organisation’s risk.
COURSE DETAILS LVL. DURATION
NQA ISO 27001 ISMS (Information Security) E-Learning Introduction Training 1 0.5 Days
FREE TO NQA CLIENTS
NQA ISO 27001 ISMS (Information Security) 1 2 Days
Introduction and Implementation Training
NQA ISO 27701 ISMS (Information Security) 1 2 Days
Introduction and Implementation Training
CQI and IRCA ISO 27001 ISMS (Information Security) 2 2 Days
Internal Auditor Training (A2089)
CQI and IRCA ISO 27001 ISMS (Information Security) 3 3 Days
Lead Auditor Conversion Training (A2127)
CQI and IRCA ISO 27001 ISMS (Information Security) 2+3 5 Days
Lead Auditor Training (A2246)
32 ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE
NQA ASSOCIATE
PARTNER PROGRAMME
If you are looking for a
consultant to assist you
with a new or existing
management system,
NQA can help!
Our APP has consultants from all over
the country enlisted on it. The register is
designed to help you find experienced
consultants who can help.
y
To
o u
fi
r
n
c
d
e
a
rt i
c
fi
o
c
n
a
s
ti
u
o
l
n
ta
j
n
o
t
u
t
r
o
n e
s
y
u p
c
p
o
o
n
r
ta
t
c
y
t
o
u
u
s
t h
o
r
n
o
:
ugh
T R
USTED GLOBALLY
0800 052 2424 (option 2) or email sales@nqa.com •
S
Y
IN
E
C
A
E
R
19
S
88
•
0015
ISO 27001:2022 IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE 33
www.nqa.com