Primary Horizontal
Commissioned by
High Risk Users and
Where to Find Them
A CYENTIA INSTITUTE STUDY BASED ON DATA FROM ELEVATE SECURITY
Key Findings
HIGH RISK USERS ARE THE TOP
QUARTILE (75TH PERCENTILE OR ABOVE)
OF USERS IN AN ORGANIZATION WHO
HAVE HAD AT LEAST ONE INSTANCE
OF RISKY BEHAVIOR, OR EVENT.
THERE AREN’T VERY MANY OF THEM,
BUT THEIR IMPACT IS FELT ACROSS
THE ORGANIZATION
HIGH RISK USERS ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR:
» 41% of all simulated phishing clicks
» 30% of all real-world phishing clicks
» 54% of all secure-browsing incidents
» 42% of all malware events
HIGH RISK USERS ARE EVERYWHERE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
IN THE ORGANIZATION CHART, BUT
SOME DEPARTMENTS HAVE MORE HIGH
It’s a horror story that many RISK USERS THAN OTHERS
organizations are familiar
with - an employee clicks a
CUSTOMER RELATIONS DEPARTMENTS
link or visits a website, and
HAVE A HIGHER PERCENTAGE OF HIGH
chaos ensues. At best, it’s RISK USERS WHEN COMPARED TO IT
just a minor disruption. At DEPARTMENTS.
worst, business continuity is
broken, and an organization’s
IN TURN, IT DEPARTMENTS HAVE A
critical infrastructure is
HIGHER PERCENTAGE OF HIGH RISK
at risk. Regardless of the USERS WHEN COMPARED TO PRODUCT
outcome, managing human risk DEPARTMENTS.
is a major part of business
today. In this report, we dive
CLICKS ON SIMULATED PHISHING ARE THE
into what makes workers high
MOST COMMON HIGH RISK BEHAVIOR.
risk, where those high risk
HOWEVER, THERE ISN’T A CORRELATION
users spend their time, what
BETWEEN HIGH RISK USERS WHO CLICK
are their riskiest behaviors, ON SIMULATED PHISHING LINKS AND
and what that might mean for HIGH RISK USERS WHO CLICK ON REAL-
your organization’s security. WORLD PHISHING LINKS.
2
CYENTIA.COM
Key Findings
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 3
CYENTIA.COM
Introduction
You’ll be hard-pressed to find a security professional that hasn’t
heard the cliche, “people are the weakest link in the chain.” And there
is a good reason for that. In the process of doing their daily work,,
knowingly or not, people can make decisions that negatively impact
their organization. For decades, enterprise information security
programs have tried to mitigate “human risk” by implementing various
AT EVERY PART OF THE
types of training and checkpoints. But do these types of processes
PROCESS, KNOWINGLY actually work?
OR NOT, PEOPLE CAN
MAKE DECISIONS THAT According to the 2022 Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report
NEGATIVELY IMPACT (DBIR), 82% of all data breaches involve human interaction. This report
might lead us to believe that all human interactions are inherently
THEIR ORGANIZATION.
dangerous. However, the findings in our last report offer some solace
- most users are not risky, but a tiny percentage carry a high risk.
FOR DECADES, We previously found that 76% of users have never clicked a phishing
ENTERPRISE link in an email in contrast to the 4% of users that are responsible
for 80% of phishing incidents. Along those same lines, while 93% of
INFORMATION SECURITY
users have never had a malware incident, 3% are responsible for 92%
PROGRAMS HAVE
of all malware events.
TRIED TO MITIGATE
“HUMAN RISK” BY
So, while most users aren’t inherently risky, a tiny percentage of users
IMPLEMENTING VARIOUS can be considered “high risk.” For this report, the Cyentia Institute
TYPES OF TRAINING AND analyzed almost eight years’ worth of data from Elevate Security –
from June 2014 - July 2022. Using what we have learned about users
CHECKPOINTS.
from the previous report, we’ll be taking a deeper look into what a
high risk user is, where they work in your organization, and how they
BUT DO THESE TYPES OF impact organizations like yours.
PROCESSES ACTUALLY
WORK?
What is a High
Risk User?
“THE CALL IS COMING FROM INSIDE THE HOUSE”
Let’s kick off by defining what makes a user high risk. Using what
we know from our past analysis, a high risk user has a history of
engaging in risky behavior at a higher rate. The vast majority of an
organization’s users do not fall under this definition, but a small yet
impactful group of users do.
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 4
CYENTIA.COM
Risky behavior
Now let’s make the definition of high risk more concrete. What exactly is “risky behavior” and how much does
a user have to do to be high risk? We define risky behavior, or high risk behavior, in three different categories:
Phishing, Malware, and Browsing.
Phishing – Real and Simulated
For our purposes, we will discuss two forms of phishing - simulated and real. In our data set, we logged over 3.4
million simulated phishing emails sent. The overall click rate? 7.6%. On the other hand, malicious actors commit
real phishing attacks and they’re the real deal. When a high risk user clicks on a real phishing link, the impact
can be disastrous. In our data set, we logged over 1.8 million real phishing emails delivered, with an overall click-
through rate of 4.1%.
There is a pretty intriguing difference right off the bat. We have almost three times as many simulated phishing
emails sent as real phishing emails. This difference could signal that organizations are zealous about minimizing
the number of high risk users by implementing more awareness training.
Percent of Users Real-World Phishing
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
15%
10%
5%
2%
0%
Simulated Phishing
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
15%
10%
5%
2%
0%
0 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1k
Emails Recieved Per Year
FIGURE 1: COMPARISON OF PHISHING EMAILS RECEIVED PER EMPLOYEE PER YEAR FOR REAL-WORLD
PHISHING AND SIMULATED PHISHING CAMPAIGNS.
We can see a few interesting things by looking at the distribution of
phishing emails received in a year - both simulated and real. First,
some people receive disproportionately more real phishing emails
than their peers. In contrast, simulated phishing emails are delivered
at more regular rates. This makes sense when we think of this type of
phishing as a training/awareness exercise. This pattern can also be a
product of a consequential real phishing event occurring that inspires
an organization to double down on training programs – simulated
phishing emails being one of the primary ways to educate employees
on how sophisticated attackers can be.
Malware
Malware events are much rarer than phishing events, both real
and simulated. In our current data set, we explored a total of 9,238
malware events, which were caused by 0.8% of users engaging with
the malicious software. While both malware events and phishing
events can instantly impact organizations, there is some solace
in the fact that malware events are less common. Succumbing to
phishing attacks can have some disastrous consequences, but it just
allows hackers in the door. Malware events allow attackers to “make
themselves at home” in your network.
Browsing
While phishing and malware behaviors can immediately impact an
organization’s network, there is also another risky behavior that users
can engage in - browsing the Internet. It’s something that every single
human on the Internet does, and on its own, isn’t inherently risky.
However, waiting behind every legitimate website are questionable
ones - sometimes even malicious websites that aim to confuse users
into engaging with dangerous content that looks “safe enough.”
Because of this danger, many organizations enforce browsing and
content controls to prevent users from accessing websites that can
potentially cause harm.
In our previous report, our data came from each organization’s
definition of what websites can cause potential harm. This included
websites that might be leveraged to compromise a user’s machine,
and those that are simply “time wasters.” This time around we focus
only on browsing behavior involving websites known to be the home
for various web based attacks. What harm does visiting a website
that isn’t legitimate cause? Users are then rapidly bombarded with
malware, phishing campaigns, drive-by-downloads, and more.
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 5
CYENTIA.COM
WE FOCUS ONLY ON
BROWSING BEHAVIOR
INVOLVING WEBSITES
KNOWN TO BE THE
HOME FOR VARIOUS
WEB BASED ATTACKS.
WHAT HARM
DOES VISITING A
WEBSITE THAT ISN’T
LEGITIMATE CAUSE?
USERS ARE RAPIDLY
BOMBARDED WITH
MALWARE, PHISHING
CAMPAIGNS, DRIVE-
BY-DOWNLOADS, ETC.
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 6
CYENTIA.COM
So, What Makes a High
Risk User?
The three risky behaviors above highlight the pitfalls that users are routinely exposed to and tempted by. Does
one group in an organization have more risky users than others, and does the role that an individual has have any
influence? Since we know that risky users participate in any of the above three behaviors, how can we ensure we
focus on the riskiest users in an organization?
For us to take a deeper look at risky user data, we’ll have to continue to define what a risky user is. A high risk
user is a user in the top quartile (75th percentile or above) of users in their organization who have had at least one
instance of risky behavior or event. As in the last report, this is an organization-specific measure - one company’s
75th percentile might be one malware incident in a year, while another might be 20. However, since we are interested
in finding out where organizations’ high risk users are, this measurement allows us to concentrate on the most
egregious of them all.
A HIGH RISK USER IS A USER IN THE TOP QUARTILE (THE 75TH
PERCENTILE OR ABOVE) OF USERS IN THEIR ORGANIZATION WHO
HAVE HAD AT LEAST ONE INSTANCE OF RISKY BEHAVIOR OR EVENT.
Characterizing the cutoffs of high risk
Since this is an organization-specific definition, let’s get a little deeper into what the top quartile actually means.
CATEGORY MEDIAN THRESHOLD MAX THRESHOLD
REAL PHISHING CLICKS More than 8% click rate More than 14% click rate
SIMULATED PHISHING
More than 10% click rate More than 22.2% click rate
CLICKS
MALWARE EVENTS SECURE More than 1.2 events/year More than 1.2 events/year
BROWSING EVENTS More than 3.7 events/year More than 177 events/year
TABLE 1 HIGH RISK BEHAVIOR THRESHOLDS
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 7
CYENTIA.COM
Across the three risky behaviors (phishing, malware, and secure browsing), we can see a large variance in the
number of events that constitute both the median and max threshold.
For Secure Browsing events, while the median threshold hovers around 3.7 events per year in an organization ,
the Max threshold is greater than 177 events per year. However, the trend continues within the phishing behavior
- the median and the max threshold of simulated phishing clicks are both higher than that of real phishing clicks.
Malware events seem to be the least common risky behavior that risky users take - with both the median and the
max threshold being close to the same.
THE TAKEAWAY HERE IS THAT THE DEFINITION OF “HIGH RISK” IS
(AND SHOULD BE!) ORGANIZATIONALLY SPECIFIC. EACH ORGANIZATION
HAS A DIFFERENT HUMAN RISK EXPOSURE BY VIRTUE OF OPERATING IN
DIFFERENT INDUSTRIES AND HAVING DIFFERENT CULTURES. WE HOPE THE
ABOVE HELPS YOU UNDERSTAND BETTER WHERE YOUR ORGANIZATION FALLS.
How many high risk users are there?
So, how many users actually cross the thresholds above? For a typical organization,
these thresholds result in about 12% of users being categorized as high risk. Since
our definition is organization specific, this rate can vary, with some organizations
FOR A TYPICAL
having as few as 5% and others as many as 20%!
ORGANIZATION,
ABOUT 12.8%
If users are high risk in one category, do they tend to be high risk across other
OF USERS ARE
categories? Turns out, the answer is “sometimes” and is probably even more
CATEGORIZED AS organization specific than the definition of high risk user. For now, we’ll stick to high
HIGH RISK. risk in any category that means “high risk”. After all, the attacker doesn’t care how
they get in, only that they do.
For a typical organization, about 12.8% of users are categorized as high risk.
Why we worry about high risk users:
30
% 41%
54
% 42%
of all real-world of all simulated of all secure- of all malware
phishing clicks phishing clicks browsing incidents events
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 8
CYENTIA.COM
Where are High Risk
Users Hiding?
Now that we know that the call is most definitely coming from inside the house, it’s time to figure out where exactly
it’s coming from. Understanding where high risk users are in an organization can allow organizations to meet their
challenge head-on, while diving deeper into answering the question “why.” Do some roles inherently come with
more risk and, therefore, have more high risk users by default?
What departments are high risk users
hiding in?
When we think about high risk
Customer Service 22.0%
R&D 18.5% users and what departments they
Data Analysis 16.5% might be in, we might find ourselves
Creative 13.7%
quickly jumping to conclusions. Are
Product 12.6%
Sales 12.3% the employees in IT less likely to
Legal 12.2% engage in high risk behaviors than
HR 11.8%
those in sales departments? The
Marketing 11.6%
Admin/Ops 10.8% teams advocating for stricter security
Engineering 10.8%
measures and leading training
Other 9.76%
Accounting/Finance 9.76% surely can’t be high risk teams,
IT 8.49% right? Stereotypes about technically
Executive 8.37%
savvy or unsavvy personnel can
QA 8.09%
Purchasing 7.45% sometimes cloud judgment, so
Board 1.50% let’s look at what the data says.
0% 5% 10% 15% 20%
Percent High Risk
Most departments are composed
22.0% of about 10% high risk users,
Customer Service
18.5% but there is some variation. The
R&D
16.5%
Data Analysis top of Figure 2 gives the raw
13.7%
Creative percentages and the bottom shows
12.6%
Product
12.3% the difference from IT. However,
Sales
12.2% beyond the median percentage of
Legal
11.8%
HR high risk users, looking at the range
11.6%
Marketing 10.8% of high risk users by departments
Admin/Ops
10.8% gives us a clearer picture.
Engineering
9.76%
Other
9.76%
Accounting/Finance
8.49% FIGURE 2 (LEFT): PERCENT
IT
8.37% HIGH RISK BY DEPARTMENT
Executive
8.09%
QA
7.45%
Purchasing
1.50%
Board
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40%
Percent high risk
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 9
CYENTIA.COM
So, let’s take a moment to compare the rest of an organization’s departments to IT, since IT seems to be the
barometer that most organizations use for “good users.” About 10% of IT department employees are considered
high risk users, represented by the dotted line. It makes a clear distinction between those departments with
fewer or more high risk users. While the creative department clearly catches our attention, the wide confidence
margin has us looking to other departments with a much closer margin - like customer service. Customer relations
departments have a marginally higher percentage of high risk users compared to IT departments. Interestingly
enough, product departments, along with the executive suite, have a much lower percentage of high risk users
compared to IT departments.
The risk differences between these departments might all come down to the behaviors that each of these
departments need to exhibit to succeed. Customer relations departments are often responsible for communicating
with a wide breadth of users, which may lead to them being exposed to and engaging in more high-risk behaviors.
In contrast, product departments tend to be a little more closed off from external dealings. Those external
interactions are ripe with the possibility of coming across a malicious site, link, or piece of code. But is there any
data to support that hypothesis?
Different categories of high risk by department
Let’s take a look at risk by department. Does one department seem to harbor more high risk users than others?
Does the risky behavior exhibited differ based on what department the high risk user works in?
High Risk Category
Malware Secure Browsing Real Phishing Simulated Phishing
Accounting/Finance 0.59% 12.26% 1.09% 10.09%
Admin/Ops 0.46% 13.83% 1.3% 9.41%
Board 0% 0% 9.52%
Creative 0% 0% 14.29%
Customer Service 0% 10.9% 0.09% 19.25%
Data Analysis 0.68% 13.33% 0% 16.55%
Engineering 0.58% 17.63% 0.44% 10.82%
Executive 0% 2.02% 0.37% 6.86%
HR 0.75% 16.43% 1.91% 12.08%
IT 0.24% 17.17% 0.75% 8.66%
Legal 0% 16.86% 1.82% 13.07%
Marketing 3.28% 14.29% 1.7% 15.93%
Medical Lab 0% 21.31% 3.43% 13.45%
Other 0.18% 22.32% 0.94% 10.54%
Product 0% 11.64% 1.12% 0.66%
Purchasing 0% 0% 8.88%
QA 0% 0% 9.25%
R&D 1.99% 19.05% 2.16% 1.08%
Sales 0.16% 1.67% 2.4% 14.51%
FIGURE 3: COMPARISON OF HIGH RISK CATEGORIES ACROSS DEPARTMENTS
In figure 3, we see some of those answers start to come out of the woodwork. For example, research and
development tends to have the highest rate of events in malware behavior, while customer service departments
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 10
CYENTIA.COM
have the highest rate of events in simulated phishing. What is important to note is that the highest percentage of
risky events happens within browsing behaviors - with lab, research and development, and other, all registering
around 20%. Malware and real phishing events seem to happen less frequently across the board. However, that
does not mean that they are less impactful events when they do occur.
This isn’t enough to really say that one department has inherently more high risk users than another, but it gives
us a moment to think about the differences that each department has. When comparing a customer service
department to a research and development department, the roles and responsibilities vary greatly. While a
customer service role is used to dealing with many external communications, an R&D role probably works with
many more files that get passed back and forth via email or a shared drive.
This implies that organizations should perhaps focus their security resources differently across an organization.
Maybe turning up the sensitivity on your phishing detection for the customer service department is warranted
(potentially at the expense of missing legitimate communications).
Where in the org chart are they hiding?
The risky behaviors across departments don’t quite give us the full picture of where those high risk users really
are. Do managers or non-managers tend to be high risk users? Are contractors inherently more risky than full time
employees? If we are able to identify where in the organization risky users are, we might be able to gain a little
insight on how we can potentially mitigate risk based on organizational location.
Managers
Manager 17%
Not Manager 12%
0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14% 16%
FIGURE 4: PERCENT OF USERS THAT HIGH RISK BASED ON WHETHER THEY ARE A MANAGER OR NOT
Overall, we only see a slight difference in risk between managers and non managers, with 19% of risky users
identified as managers, and 13% as non-managers. Before going any further here, it’s important to note that every
organization has a different make up of managers and non-manager employees. However, since managers tend to
have more access to business critical data, systems, and information, organizations that have a large managerial
headcount might want to increase the controls they have in place for this group of authorized users.
Since there is a difference between managers and non-managers, does it matter what department these managers
versus non-managers are in, when it comes to high risk users?
Accounting/ Customer
Finance Board Service Engineering HR Legal Medical Lab Product QA Sales
Admin/Ops Creative Data Analysis Executive IT Marketing Other Purchasing R&D
Not Manager 10.5% 10.9% 1.54% 9.09% 21.4% 15.9% 10.6% 7.96% 13.7% 9.05% 15.8% 14.9% 13.6% 11.6% 10.5% 8.21% 9.38% 19.8% 14.4%
Manager 12.5% 14.3% 7.69% 33.3% 27.3% 19.3% 14.0% 14.9% 12.8% 15.4% 18.4% 16.4% 15.7% 14.4% 15.9% 10.0% 7.62% 21.1% 11.1%
Higher Risk
FIGURE 5: COMPARING RISK FOR MANAGERS VS NON-MANAGERS ACROSS DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 11
CYENTIA.COM
It’s actually pretty interesting to look at, especially when we think
about risky users who are managers and those who are not. For
BROWSING SEEMS
example, high risk users are much more prevalent when looking at
TO BE THE RISKIEST
managers in the creative department, especially when compared
to non-managers in the same department. Creative has the widest BEHAVIOR FOR
gap in high risk users when comparing managerial roles to non- MANAGERS.
managerial roles, while research & development, marketing, human
resources, and accounting are all a little closer together. This could be
SO TAKING
due to how much external collaboration might happen with creative
departments. Creative departments often find themselves as a INVENTORY OVER
middle point for plenty of projects - handing things back and forth to CONTROLS THAT YOU
other teams for approval and then ultimately publication/go live - so
HAVE SET MIGHT BE A
this could possibly be one reason why managers in this department
GOOD WAY TO START
seem to be the most high risk. What is interesting to point out, is
TO CURB THIS.
that the board seems to have the lowest prevalence of high risk users
regardless of whether they are managers or not.
Earlier, we talked about the risky behaviors that high risk users
participate in, so let’s take a moment to also see which of these
behaviors managers and non-managers get caught up in.
Real Secure Simulated
Malware Phishing Browsing Phishing
Manager 0.06% 0.74% 6.44% 9.73%
Not Manager 0.08% 0.20% 1.72% 10.04%
Higher Risk
FIGURE 6: COMPARING RISK FOR MANAGERS VS NON-MANAGERS ACROSS RISK CATEGORIES
By and large, managers and non-managers have higher instances of engaging with simulated phishing events.
Secure browsing is where we see the largest difference between managers and non-managers, with an almost 5%
difference between the two. Since our data set has already removed legitimate sites that might end up just being a
productivity timesuck, like many social media sites, this means that there is a marked difference in how managers
and non-managers interact with secure browsing. Malware instances are virtually equal across the board. This
observation still lines up with our observations earlier in this report that simulated phishing events are the most
common high risk behavior (and event), while malware tends to be the least.
So what does this mean for organizations? Browsing seems to be the riskiest behavior for managers, so taking
inventory over the controls that you have set might be a good way to start to curb this. Now that we’ve taken a
closer look at the high risk users in both the manager and non-manager role, let’s turn our attention to someone
else that companies rely on: contractors.
Contractors
Contractors can often be lifelines for many organizations. They often help fill in the gaps, and assist with
business-critical continuity. In a post-2020 world, they are, more often than not, almost as necessary as full-time
employees. However, do contractors carry more risk than employees? Are they more likely to be a high risk user
for organizations? Logic would tell us “probably, “ since they often aren’t bound to the same security training, or
regulations, that full-time employees typically have.
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 12
CYENTIA.COM
Accounting/ Customer
Finance Board Service Engineering HR Legal Medical Lab Product QA Sales
Admin/Ops Creative Data Analysis Executive IT Marketing Other Purchasing R&D
Not Contractor 12.7% 12.7% 11.8% 15.4% 22.7% 18.1% 12.6% 16.5% 14.6% 12.6% 16.5% 17.7% 14.6% 14.4% 13.1% 8.43% 9.95% 20.9% 14.6%
Contractor 6.91% 5.66% 0.875%6.38% 4.39% 5.91% 4.01% 4.72% 4.00% 4.17% 3.13% 5.22% 0% 12.5% 3.57% 0% 13.0%
Higher Risk
FIGURE 7: COMPARING RISK FOR FULL TIME EMPLOYEES TO CONTRACTORS IN DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS
In almost all of these cases, except in the sales and purchasing departments, contractors are less likely to be
risky users when compared to full time employees. We can see a few unknowns, which is most likely due to the
reporting organizations not using contractors who report to those departments (which is most likely the case in
research & development, product, and the board), or an oversight in tagging (which is most likely the case when it
comes to creative).
The contractors who are working in sales and purchasing give us an opportunity to think about how that department
not just interacts with their customers, but how they can also work to keep their contractors safer when dealing
with other external entities. It is not uncommon for sales and purchasing contractors to be working and interacting
with multiple employees and other contractors at any given time. Each additional touch point that a contractor has
is another opportunity for a high risk behavior to take place. While the success of these teams is dependent on
their interactions, both internally and externally, having an additional set of controls in place might help curb the
amount of extraneous risk.
But before we can talk about what controls would be most appropriate, we should take a look at what high risk
behaviors contractors partake in.
Malware Real Phishing Secure Browsing Simulated Phishing
Not Contractor 0.1% 0.32% 2.97% 11.89%
Contractor 0.02% 0% 0.09% 4.54%
Higher Risk
FIGURE 8: COMPARING RISK FOR EMPLOYEES VS. CONTRACTORS ACROSS DIFFERENT RISK CATEGORIES
Simulated phishing events, again, are the most prevalent across employees and contractors - with employees
almost three times more likely to engage with those emails than contractors. Why would there be such a gap? Since
some contractors may work with multiple clients and prospects, there is a high chance that they have developed
a sixth-sense around phishing emails. During the pandemic, malicious users preyed on unemployed and self-
employed people with phishing attacks geared around employment opportunities and business prospects. So,
maybe contractors still have a sour taste in their mouth and have their guard up when it comes to all things phishing.
The other reason there may be a gap? Many organizations often have strict controls around their contractors as a
general rule.
Secure browsing is much more commonplace in employees, and this could just be due to the nature of a contractor.
When someone is an hours-billable worker, any time that is used not working on whatever it is they have been
contracted to do, isn’t paid. So, for many contractors, partaking in secure browsing high risk activity may not even
be something they consider.
Taking it back up to the previous chart, we saw that contractors in purchasing and sales had the highest percentage
of high risk users. It wouldn’t be out of the question to say that contractors in those two departments are most likely
HIGH RISK USERS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM 13
CYENTIA.COM
to engage with simulated phishing attacks, just like employees. So what does this mean for organizations? Maybe
give your contractors a heads up that your organization does phishing training (similar to how you communicate
it with your employees), and see if the rates go down. It could just be a case of contractors not wanting to miss an
email from their client, which then leads them into risky behavior.
Location in the org chart
Highest Risk, 51% away from top of organization
15.0%
14.0%
13.7%
13.0%
12.0%
11.0%
Bottom-Level Lower Middle Upper C-Suite
Management Management Management
Position in Company
FIGURE 9: RISK BY POSITION IN ORG CHART
It seems like where you are on the organization chart also plays a small role in determining high risk users. When
we take a look up and down the organization chart, measuring the distance that a user is from the top of an
organization, we can see that both the top and bottom rungs of an org chart seem to harbor less risky users when
compared with the middle.
Does this mean that middle management is riskier? Not necessarily, but it does seem like that part of the
organization chart has the highest percentage of high risk users. What it might mean is that the middle of the
organization chart has the most people that have the highest amount of touch points throughout the company
and with external vendors. If we think about the function of management, they are there to manage a team of
employees below them, and then communicate to a team of upper management above them. Then when you mix
in the likelihood that middle management may also be in charge of contractors who are helping supplement the
work done by their employees, you find the middle swath of your organization flush with multiple risky touch points.
So what does this mean for organizations? The middle of your organization chart packs a powerful punch for
business continuity and success. Giving your management teams the support they need can go a long way in
helping them limit the amount of touch points they have to interact with, which in turn, may help decrease the high
risk behaviors that they unknowingly participate in.
Conclusion
We kicked off this report by asking, “where do high risk users hide in organizations?” The answer to this
question seems to be “everywhere.” However, it’s a little more nuanced than that.
Firstly, we looked at high-risk users’ behaviors: phishing attacks (both simulated and real), browsing, and
malware. What we found was that the simulated phishing attacks - by and far- outnumber any other type
of high risk behavior. What is really interesting, though, is that there doesn’t seem to be a clear correlation
between simulated phishing attacks and real world phishing attacks. What appears to be taking place is
that organizations are investing in phishing attack training, and high risk users are interacting with them
more, maybe because there is just MORE training to begin with.
We found that high risk users are about 10% of each department in an organization, plus or minus a few
percent depending on which department they are a part of. While IT is typically the barometer for what
many think of as a “low risk” user, when we look directly at how different organizations stack, a few
departments have less high risk users than IT.
Beyond the department level, we also found that managers carry a slightly higher percentage of high risk
users than non-managers. But, when we looked deeper into which high risk behaviors the high risk users
in manager and non-managerial roles took, we found that managers were less likely to get caught up in
simulated phishing.
All in all, we know the call is coming from inside the house, but the “who” question seems to be organization
Primary Horizontal
specific. Looking at where we found the highest concentration of high risk users may be able to lead you
in the right direction. But ultimately, the size and organizational make-up of your organization might
influence where your most high-risk users are.
Elevate Security is the first company to tackle User Security head on. Every security professional freely
admits that their own users are their biggest risk, unwittingly leading to 90% of security events and
causing security teams to drown in alerts and incidents unnecessarily. Yet, there has been nothing that
effectively helps to understand or deal with that risk. Elevate Security identifies the highest risk users
and provides automated playbooks and safeguards to proactively protect the business from attacks,
reducing the number of alerts and easing the load on security teams.
Find out more at www.elevatesecurity.com
Cyentia Institute is a research and data science firm working to advance cybersecurity knowledge and
practice. We do this by partnering with security vendors and other organizations to publish high-quality,
data-driven content like this study. Find out more at www.cyentia.com