Microsoft
Digital Defense Report
OCTOBER 2021
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
CHAPTER 1 CHAPTER 4 CHAPTER 6
Introduction Supply chain, IoT, Disinformation
and OT security
3 I ntroduction 110 I ntroduction
5 Our 2021 focus areas 111 D isinformation as an emerging threat
71 I ntroduction
113 Mitigation through media literacy
72 Challenges in managing risk associated with
114 Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor
the supplier ecosystem
117 C ampaign security and election integrity
CHAPTER 2 73 How Microsoft thinks about supply chain
76 IoT and OT threat landscape
The state of cybercrime
81 The 7 properties of highly secured devices
82 Applying a Zero Trust approach to IoT solutions CHAPTER 7
8 I ntroduction
83 IoT at the intersection of cybersecurity and
8 T he cybercrime economy and services Actionable insights
sustainability
10 Ransomware and extortion
84 IoT security policy considerations
20 Phishing and other malicious email 122 I ntroduction
34 M alware 123 S ummary of report learnings
38 Malicious domains 128 C onclusion
42 Adversarial machine learning CHAPTER 5
Hybrid workforce security
Contributing teams at Microsoft
CHAPTER 3 89 Introduction
91 A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work
Nation state threats
93 Identities
98 D evices/Endpoints
48 Introduction
99 Applications
49 T racking nation state threats
100 N etwork
52 What we’re seeing
104 I nfrastructure
57 Analysis of nation state activity this year
105 Data
69 Private sector offensive actors
106 P eople
69 Comprehensive protections required
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 2
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Our 2021 focus areas
Introduction
TOM BURT, CORPORATE VICE PRESIDENT, CUSTOMER SECURITY & TRUST
Over the past year the world has borne witness to a burgeoning cybercrime economy and the rapid rise THE MICROSOFT
of cybercrime services. We have watched this global market grow in both complexity and fervency. We’ve
DIGITAL DEFENSE
seen the cyberattack landscape becoming increasingly sophisticated as cybercriminals continue—and even
REPORT DRAWS ON
escalate—their activity in times of crisis. New levels of supply chain and ransomware attacks were a powerful
reminder that we must all work together, and in new ways, to protect the cybersecurity of the planet. INSIGHTS, DATA,
AND SIGNALS
We see transparency and information sharing learnings that companies, governments, and By continually sharing insights we and others in the
as essential to the protection of the ecosystem. consumers can use to further secure individuals and industry derive from the work we do, we hope to
FROM ACROSS
Knowledge brings power, and to that end, security environments. empower everyone to defend the online ecosystem
professionals need diverse and timely insights into more effectively. MICROSOFT,
the threats they are defending against. The Microsoft Digital Defense Report draws on
insights, data, and signals from across Microsoft, Microsoft has made significant and ongoing INCLUDING
Microsoft serves billions of customers globally, including the cloud, endpoints, and the intelligent investments to increase and improve the knowledge
THE CLOUD,
allowing us to aggregate security data from a broad edge.1 Thousands of Microsoft security experts we derive from our threat signals. These investments
and diverse spectrum of companies, organizations, across 77 countries interpret and contribute to the deliver the highly synthesized and integrated
ENDPOINTS, AND
and consumers. Informed by over 24 trillion insights gained from our advanced engineering insights that we share here. Our goal in aggregating
security signals per day, our unique position helps and threat signals. Our security experts include these learnings is to help organizations understand
THE INTELLIGENT
us generate a high-fidelity picture of the current analysts, researchers, responders, engineers, and the ways in which cybercriminals are continually
state of cybersecurity, including indicators that help data scientists. We also share lessons learned from shifting their modes of attack—and determine the EDGE.
us predict what attackers will do next. Our goal in customers transitioning to a hybrid workforce and best ways to combat those attacks. We write and
creating the Microsoft Digital Defense Report is to frontline stories from our incident responders. Of share this report in the spirit of empowering the
bring together integrated data and insights from course, there is malign activity we do not see, some global community to benefit from the insights,
more teams, across more areas of Microsoft than of which is reported on by others in the industry. observations, and transparency generated by our
ever before. We will share what we’re seeing to help While the defender community at Microsoft works unique mission and vantage point.
the global community strengthen the defense of the hard to identify threats and keep our customers
digital ecosystem, and we will include actionable informed, the bad actors are skilled and relentless.
1 These signals are collected with customer privacy in mind. The data we collect depends on the context of your interactions with Microsoft and the choices you make, including your privacy settings and the products and features you use. MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 33
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Our 2021 focus areas
Microsoft security signals
Volume and diversity of signals processed by Microsoft
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 4
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Our 2021 focus areas
Our 2021 focus areas
2021 brought powerful reminders that to protect The state of cybercrime Nation state threats Supply chain, IoT, and OT
the future we must understand the threats of the security
In this chapter, we discuss new developments in This chapter provides an update on what we’re
present. This requires that we continually share data
the cybercrime economy and the growing market seeing in nation state adversarial activity, including The highly publicized events of the last year have
and insights in new ways. Certain types of attacks
for cybercrime services. We provide updates and reports on seven activity groups we have not made clear that securing and managing risks
have escalated as cybercriminals change tactics,
analysis of what we are seeing in ransomware and previously mentioned publicly. We provide an associated with supplier ecosystems is critically
leveraging current events to take advantage of
extortion, phishing and other malicious email, analysis of the evolving threats in this watershed important. This chapter covers some current
vulnerable targets and advance their activity through
malware, and the use of domains by cybercriminals, year with an increased focus on on-premises servers challenges in doing so in the supplier ecosystem
new channels. Change brings opportunity—for both
presenting recommendations for mitigating risk and the exposure of widespread supply chain and presents how Microsoft thinks about end-to-
attackers and defenders—and this report will focus
in each area. Finally, we share what we’re seeing in vulnerabilities. We conclude with a discussion about end supply chain security in nine investment areas.
on the threats that are most novel and relevant to
adversarial machine learning and what we are doing private sector offensive actors and our guidance for Then we turn our discussion to what we’re seeing
the community as we look to the months ahead.
to stay ahead of cybercriminals in this area. comprehensive protections. in the Internet of Things (IoT) and operational
technology (OT) threat landscape, with guidance on
Looking at the threat landscape, along with data
the properties of highly secured devices. We include
and signals from cross-company teams, five top-
specialized use cases of IoT and present some new
level areas emerged as most critical to bring into the
research informing IoT policy considerations.
sharpest focus in this report: the state of cybercrime;
nation state threats; supplier ecosystems, Internet
of Things (IoT), and operational technology (OT)
security; the hybrid workforce; and disinformation.
To provide the greatest benefit, we also extract our
recommendations and actionable learnings, and
present them throughout the report and in our
concluding chapter.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 5
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Our 2021 focus areas
Hybrid workforce security Disinformation Actionable insights
This chapter is about our greatest asset, our people. This chapter addresses the unprecedented We open this year’s concluding chapter with a
As we have moved to a hybrid workforce over disinformation campaigns and related cyber discussion of five paradigm shifts that will center the
the past year, we’ve seen developments in the operations by state and non-state actors, evolution of work around the inclusivity of people
threat landscape which point to the importance impacting public awareness and knowledge as and data. The chapter concludes with a distilled look
of adopting a Zero Trust approach. We include well as enterprise operations. We look at some at the key learnings from all the previous chapters
threat signals and other data across the six pillars parallels in cybersecurity and discuss mitigation of this report: to minimize impact of attacks we
of Zero Trust—identities, endpoints, applications, through media literacy. We include a discussion on must truly practice good cyber hygiene, implement
network, infrastructure, and data—and provide disinformation as an enterprise disruptor, providing architectures that support the principles of Zero
guidance based on what we’re seeing. We conclude a four-point plan for enterprise executives. The Trust, and ensure cyber risk management is built into
with discussions about insider threats in hybrid chapter concludes with an in-depth exploration of the business.
work environments, and an empathy imperative political campaign security and election integrity,
for managing the new and significant challenges two areas that have been targeted by disinformation
encountered by today’s workforce. campaigns.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 66
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
CHAPTER 2
The state of cybercrime
Introduction
The cybercrime economy and services
Ransomware and extortion
Phishing and other malicious email
Malware
Malicious domains
Adversarial machine learning
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 7
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
The growing threat of cybercrime
INTRODUCTION:
AMY HOGAN-BURNEY, GENERAL MANAGER, DIGITAL CRIMES UNIT
Cybercrime, whether nation state sponsored or permitted, is a threat to national security. Cybercriminals are WITH NO
targeting and attacking all sectors of critical infrastructure, including healthcare and public health, information
TECHNICAL
technology (IT), financial services, and energy sectors. Ransomware attacks are increasingly successful, crippling
KNOWLEDGE OF
governments and businesses, and the profits from these attacks are soaring.
HOW TO CONDUCT
The cybercrime supply chain, often created by criminal syndicates, continues to mature allowing anyone to buy
A CYBERCRIME
the services needed to conduct malicious activity for financial gain or other nefarious purpose. Sophisticated
ATTACK, AN
cybercriminals are also still working for governments conducting espionage and training in the new battlefield.
AMATEUR
It is not hopeless, and there are two positive trends The cybercrime specialized services has surfaced, and threat actors
THREAT ACTOR
we have seen recently. First, more governments are increasing automation to drive down their costs
economy and
and companies are coming forward when they are and increase scale. For example, we are seeing an
CAN PURCHASE
victims. This transparency helps in several ways. It increasing offer of backconnect proxies (proxies that
services
has made clear to governments around the world rotate between mobile, residential, and datacenter
A RANGE OF
that cybercrime is a threat to security. Victim stories systems) in addition to Remote Desktop Protocol
humanize and make clear the consequences of these (RDP), Secure Shell (SSH), virtual private network SERVICES TO
Through our investigations of online organized crime
attacks, drawing attention to the problem and allowing (VPN), virtual private server (VPS), web shells, cPanels
networks, frontline investigations of customer attacks,
increased engagement from incident responders and (webhosting management dashboard), and other CONDUCT THEIR
security and attack research, nation state threat
law enforcement. Second, now that governments anonymization systems.
tracking, and security tool development, we continue
ATTACKS WITH
around the world recognize that cybercrime is a threat
to see the cybercrime supply chain consolidate and
to national security, they have made combatting it a Other examples include selling compromised
mature. It used to be that cybercriminals had to ONE CLICK.
priority. Governments around the world are passing credentials that may have been obtained from
develop all the technology for their attacks. Today,
new laws regarding reporting, creating cross- phishing, scraping botnet logs or other credential
they rely on a mature supply chain, where specialists
government task forces, allocating resources, and harvesting techniques, imposter domain names,
create cybercrime kits and services that other actors
seeking out private sector assistance. phishing-as-a-service, customized lead generation
buy and incorporate into their campaigns. With the
(for example, victims by country, industry, or roles),
increased demand for these services, an economy of
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 88
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
loads (malicious software used to update malware At times there are geographic groups of actors
Average prices of cybercrime services for sale
on an infected computer), denial of service (DoS), who may offer certain services, but most of these
and more. As an illustration, in some marketplaces, cybercrime markets are global in nature. A buyer
compromised credentials are offered by different in Brazil can obtain phishing kits from a seller in
sellers for $1.00 USD to $50.00 USD, depending on Pakistan, domains from the United States, victim
a variety of variables including the perceived value leads from Nigeria, and proxies from Romania.
of the enterprise target. The number of sites offering
services has significantly increased in the past 12 These prices have remained fairly steady over the
months as well as volume of credentials and variety past several years, but like any other market they
of phishing kits. vary according to changes in supply, demand, and
externalities such as politics.
Among the services available to even amateur threat
actors are the cryptocurrency escrow services (to KEY TAKEAWAYS:
ensure services are rendered as offered) that we
• Identity and password/phishing attacks are
often see in commodity ransomware campaigns
cheap, and on the rise. Why would an attacker
where affiliate models have become firmly
break in when they can log in?
established. Nontechnical cybercriminals sign up with
• Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks
a ransomware affiliate where for 30% of the revenue,
are cheap for unprotected sites—about $300
the affiliate network will supply the ransomware,
USD/month.
recovery services, and payment services. The attacker
then buys “loads” from a market and pushes the • Ransomware kits are one of the many types of
ransomware to the loads they purchased. They then attack kits designed to enable low-skill attackers
sit back and collect their revenue. to perform more sophisticated attacks.
Organizations now face an industrialized attacker economy with skill specialization and trading of illicit
commodities. As seen in this snapshot of average prices, many commodities that can be purchased in
Not all attacks work. It’s critical that we keep the dark markets are very inexpensive, making attacks cheaper and easier to conduct (which also drives
up attack volume).
improving our defenses to increase the failure rate
of attacks and the associated cost to attackers.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 9
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Ransomware (TTPs) has maximized the impact of these attacks framework designed for taking action in combatting negotiations and raises the victim’s reputational
and driven the profits from these attacks to levels ransomware.2 Microsoft has also published a costs of not paying the ransom as the attackers likely
and extortion that were hard to imagine a few years ago. To put project plan with links to technical guidance to will not only leave the victim’s data encrypted but
it in perspective, the publicly reported profits from help organizations better prepare for and respond also leak sensitive information.
Ransomware basics and
ransomware and extortion attacks gives these to these attacks and is contributing to a National
taxonomy attackers a budget that would likely rival the budgets Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) A series of criminal activities occur long before the
of nation state attack organizations (without even publication containing a cybersecurity framework ransomware is ultimately deployed across computer
Ransomware and extortion is a high-profit, low-cost
counting the profits from attacks that never made profile for ransomware risk management.3 systems in an organization. As a result, we created a
business which has a debilitating impact on targeted
the headlines). taxonomy that focuses on the relationship between
organizations, national security, economic security,
A ransomware and extortion attack involves a entities within the ransomware ecosystem because
and public health and safety. What started as simple
To counter ransomware, a global collaborative threat actor deploying malware that encrypts any entity may play a different role at any given
single-PC ransomware has grown to include a
effort between the private sector, law enforcement, and exfiltrates data and then holds that data time.
variety of extortion techniques enabled by human
and government is necessary to reduce the for a ransom, often demanding payment in
intelligence and is affecting the networks of all types
profitability of this crime, make it more difficult to cryptocurrency. Rather than just encrypting a victim’s Ransomware attacks have evolved into human-
of organizations across the globe.
enter the ransomware market, and supply victims files and requesting a ransom in exchange for the operated ransomware, also known as “big game
with effective tools for efficient prevention and decryption key, the attackers also exfiltrate sensitive ransomware.”
This combination of real-time intelligence and
remediation. Microsoft is a contributor to the data before deploying the ransomware. This
broader criminal tactics, techniques, and procedures
Ransomware Task Force report, a comprehensive practice prevents victims from disengaging from
Ransomware taxonomy
Primary role Description
Develops Writes the malware
Deploys Sends phishing emails, deploys ransomware
Provides access Malware that loads other malware, or a group that sells access as a service
Manages/operates Leadership of a group (such as MAZE cartel membership) and/or function that
provides coordination (such as managing or operating a central extortion leak site)
Publicly reported A publicly reported connection exists
connection
2 https://securityandtechnology.org/ransomwaretaskforce/report/ 3 https://aka.ms/humanoperated Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 10
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
For example, as shown in the image at right, a threat will often provide the victim a report which includes Sample analysis of roles and relationships between entities within the ransomware ecosystem
actor may develop and deploy malware that gives root cause, criminal actor movement inside the
one threat actor access to a certain category of victim network, data exposure and exfiltration, and
victims, whereas a different threat actor may merely remediation recommendations.
deploy malware.
Depending on the jurisdiction of the victim, the
Post-breach response victim could be subject to data breach notification
requirements. A law firm will often assess the
Just as the criminal enterprise that deploys
exposure of the victim’s liability and assist the
ransomware typically involves several stakeholders
victim with meeting its regulatory obligations.
each with a particular responsibility, the response to
Importantly, the law firm will interface with relevant
ransomware also involves several key stakeholders.
law enforcement, where appropriate. Finally, if a
victim is unable to return to business operations,
If a victim of a ransomware attack has cyber
an organization specializing in negotiating with
insurance, that carrier will employ certain service
ransomware criminal syndicates will work to obtain
providers, including an incident response firm, a
the decryption key on behalf of the victim.
law firm, and an organization specializing in ransom
negotiation. Even if a victim does not have a cyber
insurance policy, these stakeholders are common to
finding a resolution to the ransom.
Once a ransomware gang locks a victims’ network,
exfiltrates data, and holds the network and
data for ransom, an incident response team will
investigate the root cause of the breach and drive
remediation efforts depending on the victim’s level
of preparedness prior to the attack. If the victim has
sufficient backups of its data or data has not been
stolen, often the incident response team will work
to remove the threat actor from the victim’s system,
Ransomware syndicates and affiliates are all working together toward these interconnected threats.
restore business operations, and apply future
Rather than one individual behind a ransomware attack, there are multiple groups of individuals, similar
mitigation measures. The incident response team
to a shared business model.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 11
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Stakeholders and roles involved in post-breach response
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 12
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Criminal economics: A Ransomware negotiation chat
changing business model
The business model for ransomware has effectively
evolved into an intelligence operation; criminal
THE
actors perform research on their target victim to
identify an optimal ransom demand. Once a criminal
RANSOMWARE
actor infiltrates a network, they may exfiltrate and
study financial documents and insurance policies.
ENTERPRISE HAS
They may also understand the penalties associated
with local breach laws. The actors will then extort EVOLVED INTO
money from their victims, to not only unlock their
systems, but also to prevent disclosure of the RANSOMWARE AS
victim’s exfiltrated data to the public. After they’ve
A SERVICE DRIVEN
collected and analyzed this intelligence, the criminal
actor will identify an “appropriate” ransom amount.
BY HUMAN
The negotiation chat, at right, with a public school
INTELLIGENCE
district to extort cash in exchange for a decryption
key to unlock the Conti ransomware deployed on AND RESEARCH.
its network demonstrates the research performed
by the criminal in advance of the negotiation.
Here, the criminal actor explains “we examined all
financial documents, bank statements for the last
year, insurance. And came to the conclusion that
you are exaggerating about poor financial condition
[sic]. We also calculated your possible losses from
lawsuits from both your staff and your students for
the leakage of their personal data. These fines will
exceed $30 million. We are not talking about the
loss of reputation, which in our opinion costs more.”
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 1133
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
There are few barriers of entry into this criminal Regardless of where ransomware is deployed, SIDEBAR: TO PAY, OR NOT TO PAY? to improve their tooling and ability to buy
enterprise. A cybercriminal does not need typically the threat actors will demand payment via In the aftermath of a ransomware attack, companies breach access to potential victim organizations.
specialized code development skills to profit from cryptocurrency through crypto wallets. Although are often completely offline—their security systems Some ransomware teams have significant
this crime. The ransomware enterprise has evolved the underlying blockchain technology facilitates tampered with, their backup systems deleted, their amounts of funds for R&D and for buying high-
into ransomware as a service driven by human transparent cryptocurrency flows, the owners of data encrypted, and their users unable to log in. end 0-days. For example, some ransomware
intelligence and research. It is no longer solely the wallets remain pseudonymous. Nonetheless, they When operations are offline and losses pile up, it teams have budget to spend up to $1 million
province of malware developers; rather, the business still need to find on- and off-ramps into the crypto is important to remember that paying the ransom USD, or more, per 0-day. While some high-end
structure is modular. Malware developers are ecosystem. At its core, the criminal actor needs demands does not guarantee the restoration of ransomware teams buy 0-days, others focus
recruiting hackers with access to networks promising to append the blockchain with a transaction and operations, nor does paying prevent future attacks. on traditional ways to gain remote access into
a “cut” of the profit. Criminals can purchase malware ultimately find a way to cash out. There are several victims’ networks.
and access to specific networks and target specific stakeholders within the cryptocurrency ecosystem In addition, we have in effect, the classic “Tragedy
• The ransomware tools become more automated
industries. This is effectively a crime syndicate where that facilitate ransom-related transactions and of the Commons”4— while it may make sense for
and effective, allowing the bad actors to
each member is paid for a particular expertise. payments. These intermediaries often exist in individual victims to pay for their own individual
scale and accelerate their attacks—with more
jurisdictions with governments that are historically benefit (restore critical business operations), the
sophistication and less effort.
In the example shown below, following the crypto unwilling to cooperate with the United States payment also contributes to the growth of this
flows, we can see where a criminal enterprise split its and others. It’s these intermediaries that facilitate damaging model for everyone. Ransom payments
bitcoin “earnings” such that approximately 15% of the flow of ill-gotten earnings from ransomware. can keep the cycle turning, as described below:
the earnings flowed to the developer/manager and The private sector through civil litigation, and
• The business model of extortionists gets
75% of the earnings flowed to the attacker. the government through prosecution, regulatory
reinforced, which also attracts more bad actors
enforcement, and international collaboration, can
into the monetization strategy. Substantial
take coordinated action against intermediaries to
revenue is supplied to the actors who then use
disrupt the payment process.
part of it for research and development (R&D)
Transaction hashes and wallet addresses
Victim ransom wallet is shown on the far left. The funds split to two different wallets on the far right.
Transaction hash Bitcoin wallet addresses
Text intentionally blurred for publication
4 Tragedy of the commons - Wikipedia Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 14
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Important details to be aware of when making the Paying a ransom fuels the ransomware EXAMPLE: CONTI RANSOMWARE
decision whether to pay ransoms: syndicates The Conti ransomware first appeared around July 2020 adopting the double extortion business model. In this
double extortion model, a victim is first extorted for ransom and for the possible publishing of their stolen
• On average, organizations that paid the ransom
data. Conti is also a ransomware as a service (RaaS), which is a subscription-based service allowing affiliates
got back only 65% of their data, with 29%
of the service ready access to ransomware-building tools and builds. Affiliates of the service agree to ransom
getting back no more than half their data.5
percentage payouts between the ransomware developer and threat actor who performed the exploitation. Conti
• Ransom decryptors are buggy and regularly fail
usually gains access to the victim network via other threats like Trickbot, IcedID, or Zloader. Once inside the
to decrypt the largest, most critical data files
victim network, Conti has a configurable reconnaissance module where it can scan internal networks looking
(files 4 GB+ in size).
for network shares and other high-value targets. Once deployed, Conti begins to encrypt user-modifiable data
• Decrypting data files is a slow and labor- and databases based on targeted file extension lists. Upon completion of the encryption, a ransom note is left in
intensive process, most customers decrypt only every file directory with instructions for the user on how to contact the ransomware actors:
Paying a ransom gives the criminals more
their most critical of data files and restore the
resources to expand their operations, helping
rest from backup. Ransom note
them become more organized and specialized.
With more funding available, the groups
• Restoring data does not undo any tampering
can improve their tools and code, enabling
performed by the attackers.
ransomware to spread through networks
• Restoring data does not secure systems to undetected by antivirus software.
prevent future attacks.
• Organizations must understand the legality of
making payments in their country. Governments
across the globe are instituting ransomware
payment reporting requirements, may have
penalties for payments that are made to
sanctioned parties, and are considering laws
that could make ransom payments illegal.
5 The State of Ransomware 2021 – Sophos News Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 15
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
The user must now upload the ransom note text file to the recovery site listed in the ransom note. The note After the ransom note is uploaded and verified and a chat session is initiated.
serves as proof of encryption and victim identification for the ransomware actors.
Ransom recovery site Chat session following ransom note upload
Conti News site
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 16
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
The negotiation phase starts with the threat actor, as they prove they can decrypt any files provided by the
victim. After a final ransom price is negotiated, the ransomware actor provides a Bitcoin wallet address for
the victim to send payment. Conti ransomware actors maintain recovery and news sites on regular top-level
domains (as on the open web) as well as on the dark web or Tor (also known as The Onion Router).
As part of the double extortion business model, the actors behind Conti maintain a news site, which serves as
the publishing site to prove that if the ransom is not paid, the victim’s private information will be posted publicly
and could be sold on the black market. The Conti News site currently lists hundreds of victims with various
samples of their private data.
Conti victims are located mostly in the United States and Europe and include public schools, healthcare
providers, manufacturing companies, US city governments, and even public utility providers.
What we’re seeing in ransomware data and signals
DEFENDER SIGNALS
Ransomware encounter rate (machine count): Enterprise customers Ransomware encounter rate (machine count): All customers
These charts show the overall increase in ransomware encounters, with notable surge to consumer and commercial encounters in late 2019,6 when RaaS
started to grow, and in early 2020 at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.7
6 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2019/12/16/ransomware-response-to-pay-or-not-to-pay/ 7 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2020/03/20/protecting-against-coronavirus-themed-phishing-attacks/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 17
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Ransomware machine counts by country (July 2020-June 2021) DART DATA
While the Colonial Pipeline ransom attack of May 2021 drew considerable public attention, our Detection
and Response Team (DART) ransomware engagement data shows that the three most targeted sectors were
consumer, financial, and manufacturing. Despite continued promises from ransomware actors not to attack
hospitals or healthcare companies during a pandemic, healthcare remains in the top-five sectors victimized by
human-operated ransomware.
DART ransomware engagements by industry (July 2020-June 2021)
The stakes have changed. There is a massive
growth trajectory for ransomware and extortion.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 18
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS Use the phases as a starting plan for what to do first, next, and later to get the most impactful elements first.
The stakes have changed. There is a massive growth trajectory for ransomware and extortion. To help protect These recommendations have been prioritized using the Zero Trust principle of assume breach, which focuses
your organization from ransomware, we recommend that organizations: on minimizing business risk by assuming the attackers can successfully gain access to your environment through
one or more methods.
Deploy ransomware protection
Microsoft supports the guidance presented in the Ransomware Playbook by the Cyber Readiness Institute.8
Learn more:
3 steps to prevent and recover from ransomware | Microsoft Security blog (9/7/2021)
Rapidly protect against ransomware and extortion | Microsoft Docs (8/24/2021)
Azure Sentinel Fusion Detection for Ransomware (microsoft.com) (8/9/2021)
The growing threat of ransomware - Microsoft On the Issues (7/20/2021)
Human-operated ransomware | Microsoft Docs (5/27/2021)
Ransom mafia analysis of the world's first ransomware cartel pdf (analyst1.com) (4/7/2021)
Prepare a recovery plan by making it harder to access and disrupt systems, which minimizes the monetary
Ransomware Playbook - Cyber Readiness Institute
incentives for ransomware attackers and makes it easier to recover from an attack without paying the ransom.
Limit the scope of damage by forcing the attackers to work harder to gain access to multiple business-critical
systems. Establish least-privilege access and adopt Zero Trust principles. These steps make it harder for an
attacker who gets in to a network to travel across the network to find valuable data to lock up. Also, encrypt
data at rest, and practice good backup-and-restore hygiene. This way, even if data is stolen it will be encrypted
and not very useful to the attackers. In the unfortunate event that the attacker does encrypt your data, you will
have a good backup to restore from and use to maintain business continuity.
Make it harder to get in by following basic cybersecurity hygiene steps that make it more difficult for attackers
to gain access to the network. The most important of these steps is the use of multifactor authentication (MFA),
which is important to raising friction for entry but will take time to complete as part of a larger security journey.
Other steps, such as keeping up to date on patching and correct configuration, can be taken to identify and
close off vulnerable entry points.
8 Ransomware Playbook - Cyber Readiness Institute Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 19
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Phishing and From our investigations on online organized crime Identity is further threatened by impersonation
networks involved in business email compromise as may be seen in BEC attacks where one party to
other malicious (BEC), we noted broad diversification of how a financial transaction is impersonated to divert
credentials are obtained, verified, and later used payments to an unauthorized recipient. Our
email
that may explain the increased threat. Threat actors investigations identified that threat actors would
are increasing their automation and purchasing monitor financially inclined messages to find an
tools to increase the value of their criminal identity to impersonate and thereafter register
Threat to identity
activities. Credentials belonging to unsuspecting homoglyph/imposter domains to resemble the email
In 2020, the FBI IC3 Report9 identified phishing victims could be obtained from phishing websites of the person being impersonated. In this case, the
as the top crime type for victim complaints. The that impersonate a myriad of online services, person whose credentials were stolen would cause
number of reports doubled compared to the automatically scraping and parsing logs belonging another person to become a victim.
previous year. Phishing poses a significant threat to infected devices that record the keys typed on
to both businesses and individuals, and credential keyboards to guessing where credentials from one
phishing was leveraged in many of the most breached online service were reused on another.
damaging attacks last year.
For each credential, there are services that enrich
the information on the identity with additional
details on the person’s identity that includes
name, company they work for, roles, seniority in
company, and industry associated to the company.
With this information, the identity could be used
in BEC attacks, to send unsolicited messages
(spam), to gather sensitive information, or to host
phishing websites in related online accounts. Even
when one attack occurs, accounts may be resold
after automated systems verify that they remain
compromised.
9 https://www.ic3.gov/Media/PDF/AnnualReport/2020_IC3Report.pdf MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 2200
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Emails determined as phish What we’re seeing be redirected to a legitimate final site—such as
the real Office 365 login page—leaving the user
Types of malicious emails
unaware that actors have obtained their credentials.
Whether their goal is to phish credentials, redirect
Meanwhile, the entered credentials are stored or
a wire transfer to their own bank account, or
sent to the attacker for later abuse or sale.
download malware onto a machine, attackers are
most likely to utilize email as their initial entry
Attackers also use consent phishing to send users
vector for a campaign. While a lot of focus is given
links that, if clicked, will grant the attacker access
to credential phishing, malicious emails are used in
and permissions to applications, such as via OAuth
multiple types of cyber incidents. Microsoft security
2.0 authorization protocol. In these instances, users
researchers observe the following three most
may unwittingly grant the attackers permissions to
common types of malicious emails:
applications that enable them to access a wealth of
sensitive information.
PHISHING
Phishing is the most common type of malicious
The number of phishing emails observed in
email observed in our threat signals. These emails
Microsoft Exchange global mail flow increased
are designed to trick an individual into sharing
Top 10 verticals affected by phishing (Defender detections, June 2021) during the period from June 2020 through June
sensitive information, such as usernames and
2021. We saw a pronounced surge in November
passwords, with an attacker. To do this, attackers
potentially related to holiday-themed phishing, and
will craft emails using a variety of themes, such
a subsequent decrease over the US winter holidays,
as productivity tools, password resets, or other
potentially indicating that attackers send fewer
notifications with a sense of urgency to lure a user
messages when many people are not working.
to click on a link.
While all industries receive phishing emails, some
The phishing webpages used in these attacks may
verticals within those industries tend to receive more
utilize malicious domains, such as those purchased
phishing campaigns than others. The verticals most
and operated by the attacker, or compromised
affected by phishing may change month to month
domains, where the attacker abuses a vulnerability
depending on several factors, including attacker
in a legitimate website to host malicious content.
objectives, availability of leaked email addresses,
The phishing sites frequently copy well-known,
or current events regarding specific sectors and
legitimate login pages, such as Office 365 or Google,
industries.
to trick users into inputting their credentials. Once
the user inputs their credentials, they will often
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 21
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Malware emails per week MALWARE DELIVERY the recipient to open the files and download the
Malware delivery is another example of how threat malware. By using these archive files to house the
actors utilize emails for their objectives. A variety malicious document—frequently an Excel or Word
of malware variants, such as Agent Tesla, IcedID, document—the attackers can use a unique archive
Trickbot, and Qakbot, use email as a primary method file for every recipient, making it more difficult for
of distribution. These emails will use either links or defenders to fully scope a campaign.
attachments to deliver malware and many times use
techniques that overlap with phishing emails. For Interestingly, between July 2020 and June 2021
example, both malware delivery email and phishing we observed an overall downward trend in the
email may use links that direct to a CAPTCHA test to number of emails containing malware, indicating
evade detection from security technologies. that attackers may be using other means of entry.
In addition, a few notable malware takedowns—
Since malware does not rely on user interaction in namely, Trickbot and Emotet—may have contributed
the same way phishing does, attackers can design to this overall decline. A large spike in October is
There has been an overall downward trend in the number of emails containing malware.
their delivery to be less noticeable to the user. For associated with the distribution of those malware
example, when using attachments as a delivery variants, and the rapid decrease following the spike
Top 15 Defender detections (June 2021)
method, attackers may use a decoy document aligns to when the Trickbot malware was taken down
with macros that, when enabled by the recipient, by Microsoft.
download the malware in the background without
the user’s knowledge. In these cases, the user may The malware that attackers distribute via email
think that the document is broken or isn’t intended changes regularly for a variety of reasons, including
for them and may be completely unaware that malware takedowns and attacker objectives. As
malicious software is running on their machine. shown in the chart on Defender detections for
June 2021, the most prolific malware observed by
One of the most common methods of malware Microsoft was Agent Tesla, which is a credential-
delivery observed in the past year was through stealing spyware. The second most observed
password-protected archive files. These emails malware, Tisifi, which identifies social engineering
contain archive files, such as ZIP attachments lures, was seen only one third as much as Agent
that are password protected, to prevent security Tesla. EncDoc and CVE-2017-11882 as the third
technologies from detonating and analyzing and fifth top detections indicate that attackers still
Spyware designed to steal credentials was the most common type of malware observed through email them. However, the passwords for these files are favor malicious documents as a common method
delivery and was detected three times as often as the next highest detection. often included in the body of the email to enable of delivering a variety of threats. The fourth top
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 22
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
detection, HTML/Phish, includes only phishing member’s birthday gift or for employees as rewards. Detecting web-based phishing Domains created specifically for attacks tend
emails that use an HTML attachment. These types of The recipient is typically asked to send the digital In the past year, web-based phishing attacks to be active for shorter periods, and with fewer
phishing frequently take the form of fake voicemail gift cards to the attacker once purchased, but we have continued to become more sophisticated. malicious URLs, than attacks that abuse legitimate
phishing messages. have also seen attackers asking the user to buy Phishing kits used by web-based phishing attacks infrastructure. Over the last year, Microsoft
physical gift cards and send a photo of the code on typically use images, context-based content, and SmartScreen has seen an increase in attacks that
BUSINESS EMAIL COMPROMISE the back of the card, enabling the attacker to resell other advanced techniques to avoid detection. begin and end within as little as an hour or two.
While not the most prolific type of malicious email them online or trade them for cryptocurrency. Our machine learning (ML) models and network
in terms of quantity, BEC has proven to be the heuristics must continuously evolve to maintain
Malicious email techniques
most financially impactful type of cybercrime.10 BEC A much more sophisticated and financially damaging effective protection. The language used by attackers
occurs when an attacker pretends to be a legitimate type of BEC is wire transfer fraud. In this type of has also improved significantly; past user guidance Attackers have adapted over time to make their
business account—utilizing either a compromised BEC, actors will insert themselves into expected to look for poor spelling and grammar is now emails more likely to evade detections and
email address, a lookalike domain they have financial transactions and ask the recipient to adjust less effective, particularly against targeted, more protections by utilizing aspects of legitimate
registered, or a free email service such as Hotmail or the bank account information on an outgoing wire advanced attacks. Modern kits are sufficiently business emails. Defenders need to protect the
Gmail—and sends emails designed to trick recipients transfer. The actors will masquerade as the intended sophisticated to masquerade as legitimate content company but also have a duty to maintain the flow
into taking some financial action, handing over recipient of the funds, so this does not seem out of in their use of spelling, grammar, and imagery. of business—and attackers rely on this fact to get
sensitive information, or providing assets, such as the ordinary to the victim. Once the victim wires the their foot in the door. In the last year, Microsoft
gift cards, to the attacker. money to the new account, it is withdrawn by the Phishers are increasingly leveraging legitimate security researchers have observed attackers using
actors and may be difficult to retrieve. Companies infrastructure, but this pattern still accounts for a numerous techniques across multiple malicious
The most common type of BEC observed by can help to avoid this type of scam by ensuring that minority of detected phishing attacks. Microsoft email campaigns to make emails appear more
Microsoft in the past year was gift card scams. In financial policies require verification for changing SmartScreen detected more than a million unique legitimate to both end users and protection
these scams, attackers will usually create a multitude accounts. Finance employees should verify via a domains used in web-based phishing attacks in technologies.
of free email accounts, changing the display name means other than email—such as from a known, the last year, of which compromised domains
depending on the target, though attackers have trusted phone number with the recipient—before represented just over 5%. This 5% of domains
also registered their own domains for these attacks making account number changes that originate typically host phishing attacks on legitimate websites
or have created target-specific free email accounts. from emails. Additionally, utilizing impersonation without disrupting any legitimate traffic so that their
They will then pretend to be someone the recipient protections features in email security products can attack remains hidden for as long as possible.
works with (usually their boss or an executive at help prevent attackers from successfully conducting
their company) and ask them to purchase gift cards this type of scam.
(often with company funds). Frequently, these emails
suggest that the sender wants them for a family
10 https://www.ic3.gov/Media/PDF/AnnualReport/2020_IC3Report.pdf; https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/06/14/behind-the-scenes-of-business-email-compromise-using-cross-domain-threat-data-to-disrupt-a-large-bec-infrastructure/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 23
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 2244
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Some common techniques observed over the past year: ABUSE OF LEGITIMATE INFRASTRUCTURE
COMPROMISED SENDERS > COMPROMISED SERVICES Defenders have often told their end users to verify aspects within an email were legitimate before interacting
For years, attackers have used compromised senders to perpetuate phishing email chains, as they use the with that email, such as the sender and any links within the email. This advice is still valuable, but sometimes
victim’s email account to send additional phishing emails. While this is still extremely prevalent, many companies the links and senders can look legitimate but contain malicious content. Attackers are shifting to abusing
have begun utilizing MFA, which reduces the effectiveness of this method. Attackers therefore are adjusting legitimate infrastructure to mask the malicious content in their emails. For sender addresses, attackers may
their methods to begin compromising entire email services, such as when NOBELIUM gained access to an email register trial tenants for services such as Office 365, which make their email appear much more legitimate.
marketing solution that enabled the attacker to send as multiple, legitimate addresses.11 Additionally, attackers are using ways to mask the malicious domain in an email, either by using open redirects
from legitimate domains or by abusing legitimate hosting platforms such as Google Drive or OneDrive. In these
Phishing email using compromised service on behalf of legitimate companies
cases, it may be tricky for users to know when an email is legitimate or malicious.
Legitimate infrastructure abuse
Attackers abuse legitimate contact forms
on websites to send emails, and legitimate
Google sites to host malware.
11 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/05/27/new-sophisticated-email-based-attack-from-nobelium/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 25
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
FAKE REPLIES DEFENSE EVASION
In addition to users being instructed to verify aspects of the email, such as the sender or links before interacting While attackers are focusing their techniques on convincing the recipient to interact with an email, they are also
with them, users have also been instructed not to interact with emails they are not expecting to receive. This is aware that all that effort will be worthless if the email is never delivered to the victim. Because of this, threat
still extremely valuable advice, but attackers are aware of this as well and have shifted their strategies to find actors are developing new means of defense evasion in email. It used to be enough for an attacker to include
ways to convince recipients that they are expecting the email. One way that they do this is by crafting fake reply a password-protected archive file to evade detection, but most security technologies can now input passwords
emails. In these cases, the attacker will take the contents of a previous email from a compromised mailbox, or included in the email to detonate them and identify malicious content. Attackers have shifted to including
will craft an entirely new email, and include it in the body of the email in a way that appears that the new email CAPTCHAs and legitimate login screens for services such as Microsoft or Google that prevent detection
is a reply. Users who have jobs that require them to email dozens of people per day may not remember each technologies from reaching the malicious content.
email they have sent. Seeing a fake reply may convince them that they are expecting the email and cause them
to interact with malicious links or attachments. Utilizing email security features that can notify a user when
an email is being sent from a user they have not interacted with before can help mitigate this technique. This
technique is a favorite of malware variants such as Emotet and IcedID and is also frequently used in BEC emails.
Fake reply email
Gift card scam BEC email using
fake reply to trick the user into
thinking they were expecting
this email.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 26
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
The digital journey of stolen credentials
Where do your stolen credentials go after
they are entered into a fake web page?
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 27
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Secret phishers: The hidden This stratification of the cybercrime world is an plug-and-play phishers have largely been viewed
increased threat to business infrastructure as as lower-level coders compared to the much more
economy of sophisticated
phish kit authors are more technically skilled than sophisticated phish kit author and mastermind of
phish kits
the phishers and have a much broader reach by the overall operation.
It is a long-held perception among research and orders of magnitude. The anonymity of the dark
business communities that victim credentials are web enables this technique. Phishing has generally
delivered to the individual (or group) operating been known to be a scheme in which a phisher
phishing campaigns. Researchers within the (or group of phishers) buys a kit on a dark web
security community12 have begun to identify more market, obtains infrastructure components such as
sophisticated kits in which not only are victim a server, a domain to host the imitation site, and an
credentials sent to the phishers running a phishing email account or other endpoint to receive victim
campaign, but they are also likely going back information. Once the infrastructure is assembled,
to the kit’s originating author or a sophisticated they essentially just “stick their poles in the water”—
intermediary who has modified the kit with a hidden the entire process is designed to be as easy as
collection account before redistributing the kit. The possible by the authors and distributers of kits.
Microsoft Digital Crimes Unit (DCU) has seen several Although it is important not to overgeneralize, these
variations of this technique.
12 https://www.wmcglobal.com/blog/phishing-kit-exfiltration-methods Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 28
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Phish kits and credential harvesting
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 29
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
What’s in Microsoft’s phishing
Trends at Microsoft, 2020-2021
defense toolbox? How we
approach employee awareness
In 2020, the industry saw a surge of phishing campaigns that has
remained steady throughout 2021. Internally at Microsoft, we saw an
increase in overall number of phishing emails, a downward trend in
emails containing malware, and a rise in voice phishing (or vishing).
Fortunately, we were prepared with an effective foundation of protective controls to reduce the number of
successful phishing attempts, and acknowledging the evolving threat landscape, we had expanded our controls
to cover other vectors that could be exploited (beyond email, such as Forms and Teams).
What’s in our toolbox
There is not a silver bullet fix for phishing; it must be solved through a multipronged approach. We focus on four
primary elements: Protective controls, User awareness, Reporting and insights, and Detect and respond.
With these methods, we have seen a 50%
year-over-year reduction in susceptibility.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 3300
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
No matter how many protective controls we have in place, mitigation remains a crucial element to combating Beyond detection and protection, it is imperative that we cultivate a security-conscious culture, equip our
the phish that make it through our defenses as threat actors increase their level of sophistication. Our security employees (our last line of defense) with skills to identify a phish, and provide a simple reporting mechanism
operations center is equipped with Microsoft Defender for Office 365’s tools and automation to quickly detect, that is a consistent experience across all platforms. Employee reporting is vital, but closing the feedback loop by
investigate, and effectively remediate malicious emails. For us, the automated incident response features have validating the report is just as important.
been key in enabling our team to move quickly because minutes matter.
Training followed by simulations, reinforcement, and targeted simulations
Beyond detection and protection, it is imperative
that we cultivate a security-conscious culture.
Despite the increased sophistication of phish, susceptibility of employees has decreased, attributed to
increased frequency of simulations and training.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 3311
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Our approach to employee phishing awareness includes annual foundational training, simulated exercises, and their support staff. The findings from our simulated exercises are also leveraged to identify opportunities within
positive reinforcement. Simulations leveraging Microsoft Defender for Office 365’s Attack Simulator and Training the product to aid employees in identifying phish (such as safety tips).
are built on incidents insights to ensure we are exposing our employees to phish that are realistic to the level
of sophistication we may see in our environment. Employees who repeatedly fall susceptible to simulations are Learn more:
phished on a more frequent basis to increase their opportunity to learn through experience and preventative
Automatically triage phish submissions in Microsoft Defender for Office 365 (9/9/2021)
guidance. We also run targeted campaigns focused on high-risk groups such as new employees, executives, and
Employee phishing awareness
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 3322
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Summary of recommendations about malicious emails
1. Use MFA to lessen the impact of credentials 6. Create and enforce finance policies that require Learn more:
being phished by attackers. employees to verify any account information
Trend-spotting email techniques: How modern
2. Develop robust user education processes that changes, including wire transfer information,
phishing emails hide in plain sight | Microsoft Security
use positive reinforcement to teach users how with the account holder.
Blog (8/18/2021)
to identify potentially malicious emails. Create 7. Ensure that all your email is effectively signed
processes wherein users can report suspicious (DKIM) and verified on delivery (DMARC)
emails and can receive feedback on whether so that your customers are protected from
the email they submitted was indeed malicious. attackers trying to send messages as your
Focus extra training on groups that may be domain/brand.
more heavily targeted, such as executives, 8. Enable advanced protections for your users,13
executive assistants, and finance employees. including:
Share real-world phishing examples that your • Look-alike domains or impersonations of
company has received with your end users so important users in the organization.
that they understand the threat and know what • Deep analysis (detonation) of
to expect. attachments and URLs across the
3. Surface external emails to recipients by • Collaboration suite to protect against
appending a tag to the subject line of any 0-day attacks.
email that originates from an email address • Post-delivery protection to remove mails
outside of your organization. that were delivered and later determined
4. Enable features that allow users to spot malicious.
emails coming from senders they have not 9. Eliminate opportunities for attackers to bypass
communicated with in the past. your security, such as allowing listing for
5. Review mail flow rules to ensure that broad senders, domains, or IP addresses.
rules are not inadvertently allowing malicious
emails to be delivered.
13 Microsoft Defender for Office 365 - Office 365 | Microsoft Docs Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 33
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Malware Other noteworthy behaviors and protection Alert counts by activity (May-June 2021)
opportunities for security operation centers are the
use of specific reconnaissance commands, processes
Trends we’re seeing
being added to startup folders, scheduled task or
registry alterations, and malicious process execution
While phishing has grown over the last year,
by abuse of Office documents. These behaviors
malware and the cybercrime infrastructure that
stand out due to widespread use among all malware
supports attacks has also continued to evolve.
regardless of sophistication, though Microsoft has
There are key malware areas where Microsoft
also observed more specific tactics that are more
365 Defender Threat Intelligence has observed
difficult for enterprises to mitigate.
changing trends in recent years, many of which
require equal parts innovative defensive strategies
Fileless malware and evasive behavior
and historically resilient mitigations such as multi-
“Fileless” malware is malware that derives most of
factor authentication and robust application security
its components from system processes or legitimate
practices.
tools already on a device, which can make it harder
to remove and detect, since more than a single file
Individualized malware techniques and actions
needs to be removed. Persistence strategies can
Within the popular malware types and delivery
include registry, scheduled task, and startup folder
methods analyzed over the past year, Microsoft
persistence to remove the necessity for malware to
observed many trends in individual tactics used
remain a static item in the filesystem. Free or easily
during infection. Despite the wide range of
available remote access trojans (RATs), banking
outcomes such as ransom, data loss, credential
trojans, and offensive toolkits like Cobalt Strike are
theft, and espionage, most pieces of malware rely
routinely utilizing process injection and in-memory
on similar strategies for establishing themselves in a
execution. These are methods of abusing stolen
network. Windows PowerShell launched by malicious
administrative privileges to move malicious code
processes with suspicious commands or encoded
into running benign processes rather than in static
values was the most common behavior Microsoft
files, to circumvent easy removal. To combat these
observed from malware in recent months. The next
kinds of behaviors it is imperative that security
most common were attempts by malware to rename
teams within organizations review their incident
payloads to mimic system processes or replace them
response and malware removal processes to include
entirely, and using malware to collect data such as
sufficient forensics to ensure common malware
credentials from browser caches.
persistence mechanisms have been fully remediated
after cleanup by an antivirus solution.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 34
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Legitimate service abuse in network Emotet encounters optimization strategies and by utilizing existing
communications infections to install browser extensions to modify
Another tactic used in many malware campaigns search results and to surface illicit material attacker
this past year utilized legitimate sites in almost content.
every stage of malware: delivery, reconnaissance,
command and control, exfiltration, malicious This was the case in 2020 with the Adrozek16
advertising, and cryptocurrency mining. Cloud malware, a browser extension used where infected
services such as Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, devices would use browser extensions to replace
Adobe Spark, Dropbox, and others are still very legitimate search results with links to malware
popular for use as initial delivery of malware, while impersonating Microsoft products and other
content “pasting” sites such as Pastebin.com, legitimate software. The operators of Gootkit, a
Archive.org, and Stikked.ch are increasingly popular malware infection that can led to ransomware,
for covert use in multi-part and fileless malware. used a slightly different technique to abuse search
In the last case, the code used in the malware is engines by purchasing advertising in 2020 to uplift
pulled directly from the pasting site and executed the links to compromised sites hosting the malware.
immediately into memory, bypassing the need to Other information-stealing malware, such as Jupyter
download malware as a single file. In January 2021, law enforcement performed a takedown, which led to the demise of the Emotet family or SolarMarker, used yet another method to appear
of malware and a dramatic subsequent decrease in Emotet encounters.14 in search results by using documents hosted
Larger trends in malware propagation and on services such as AWS, Google, and Strikingly
behavior class of evasive malware began delivering more and new infection methods as well. Lemon Duck, as content delivery network to lead users searching
BOTNET RENOVATIONS severe secondary components at faster speeds. with most emerging botnets, uses over 10 distinct for common terms via search results to PDF pages
Botnet as a term has been evolving as well. In January 2021, law enforcement performed a methods of infection across Windows and Linux that would ultimately establish persistence on their
Historically it was used to refer to a network of takedown, which led to the demise of the Emotet environments. Newer botnets are also quick to begin device.
computers completing tasks for an operator. family of malware and a dramatic subsequent using new vulnerabilities to infect servers. Despite
However, now most malware families could decrease in Emotet encounters. Botnets such as this, most methods still rely on unpatched edge Information stealing, data exfiltration, and other
potentially be classified as having botnet Phorpiex15 gradually increased in number of infected applications, lateral movement via connected drives, areas of malware delivery can increasingly leverage
components or behaviors. base hosts and delivered numerous ransomware and and weak credentials on available services. browser modifications and search results to achieve
secondary malware components to further monetize their ends. This continues to solidify a class of
As historically prevalent malware botnet its behavior, including the Avaddon ransomware. SEO AND MALICIOUS ADVERTISING malware leveraging the browser for delivery and
infrastructures such as Trickbot and Emotet were Botnets such as Lemon Duck, Purple Fox, and Search engine results and advertising are also an exploit across both consumer and enterprise sectors.
disrupted, other malware families have replaced Sysrv-Hello, surged this past year, incorporating increasingly effective means of delivering malware to
them. In their place, older botnets as well as a new new programming languages, new infrastructure, end users, both via abusing legitimate search engine
14 https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/world%E2%80%99s-most-dangerous-malware-emotet-disrupted-through-global-action 15 Thttps://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/05/20/phorpiex-morphs-how-a-longstanding-
botnet-persists-and-thrives-in-the-current-threat-environment/ 16 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2020/12/10/widespread-malware-campaign-seeks-to-silently-inject-ads-into-search-results-affects-multiple-browsers/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 35
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Browser search results manipulation malware that plants Cobalt Strike quickly, handing to gather data from and monetize the networks
off to ransomware operators. that they have access to. In addition, the volume
of network traffic plus the usual noise of constant
WEB SHELLS DEEP DIVE internet attacks means that targeted traffic aimed
Web shells remain popular with advanced at a web server can blend right in, making detection
persistent threat (APT) actors of all types, including of web shells a lot more difficult and requiring
NOBELIUM17 and HAFNIUM18 nation state activity advanced behavior-based detections.
groups. As DART and the Microsoft 365 Defender
Research Team reported in both 202019 and 2021,20 In February 2020, we reported a steady increase
web shell usage continues to climb among nation in the use of web shells in attacks worldwide. The
state groups and criminal organizations. Web latest Microsoft 365 Defender data shows that this
shell is a piece of malicious code, often written in trend not only continued, but it also accelerated;
typical web development programming languages in every month from August 2020 to January 2021,
(such as ASP, PHP, or JSP), that attackers implant we registered an average of 140,000 encounters of
on web servers to provide remote access and code these threats on servers, which was almost double
execution to server functions. Web shells allow the 77,000 monthly average.
adversaries to execute commands and steal data
from a web server or use the server as a launch pad Throughout 2021 we saw an even bigger increase,
for further attacks against the affected organization. with an average of 180,000 encounters per month.
In March 2021, we saw a huge spike in web shell
The escalating prevalence of web shells may be encounters, which we attributed to the HAFNIUM
Comparison of search results pages on an unaffected machine and one with Adrozek running.
attributed to how simple and effective they can nation state activity group targeting Exchange
be for attackers. Once installed on a server, web servers with 0-day exploits.
MALWARE TOOLS perform system and network discovery actions and
shells serve as one of the most effective means of
Malware has evolved to take advantage of tools move laterally through a network. Cobalt Strike is
persistence in an enterprise. We frequently see cases In March and April of 2021, as exploit code became
that are available and, in some cases, are not specifically designed to evade traditional detection
where web shells are used solely as a persistence available for web-facing on-premises Exchange
inherently malicious. One prime example has methodologies and offers the operator a range
mechanism. Web shells guarantee that a backdoor servers, we saw a large spike in web shell detection
been the use of Cobalt Strike, a commercial of options for performing obfuscation of their
exists in a compromised network, because an rates. This was due to multiple threat actors using
penetration testing tool. While Cobalt Strike is a attack commands. These obfuscation techniques
attacker leaves a malicious implant after establishing a “compromise first, monetize later” approach that
penetration testing, it has been used more and themselves can however become a signal, and
an initial foothold on a server. If left undetected, takes advantage of customer patching delays. Actors
more frequently in various attacks, ranging from identifying Cobalt Strike has become more essential
web shells provide a way for attackers to continue jump on opportunities as soon they arise.
nation state to human-operated ransomware, to than ever as the cybercriminal economy leads to
17 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/02/11/web-shell-attacks-continue-to-rise/ Feb 2021 18 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/03/02/hafnium-targeting-exchange-servers/ 19 https://www.microsoft.com/security/
blog/2020/02/04/ghost-in-the-shell-investigating-web-shell-attacks/ 20 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/02/11/web-shell-attacks-continue-to-rise/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 36
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
To minimize risk, organizations should accelerate their deployment of security updates, especially for internet- Summary of recommendations for malware prevention
facing systems. To minimize risk, organizations should accelerate their deployment of security updates,
1. Install security updates on all applications and operating systems promptly.
especially for internet-facing systems.
2. Enable real-time protection through an antimalware solution, such as Microsoft Defender.
3. Mitigate large attack vectors such as macro abuse, exposed edge services, insecure default configurations,
Web shell encounters, Defender signals (September 2020-June 2021)
legacy authentication, unsigned script types, and suspicious executions from certain file types delivered
through email. Microsoft offers some of these larger mitigations through the use of attack surface
reduction rules21 to prevent malware infection. Azure Active Directory users may also leverage security
defaults22 to establish baseline authentication security for cloud environments.
4. Enable Endpoint Detection and Response functionality to analyze and respond to threats based on
individual behaviors and techniques proactively.
5. Enable domain and IP-based protections on hosts as well as at network gateways, if possible, to ensure
infrastructure-based coverage is complete.
6. Turn on potentially unwanted applications (PUAs) protection. Many antimalware solutions may label
initial access threats such as adware, torrent downloaders, RATs, and Remote Management Services
(RMS) as PUA. Occasionally, these types of software may be disabled by default to prevent impact to an
environment.
7. Determine where highly privileged accounts are logging on and exposing credentials. Monitor and
investigate logon events for logon type attributes. Highly privileged accounts should not be present on
workstations.
8. Practice the principle of least privilege and maintain credential hygiene. Avoid the use of domain-wide,
admin-level service accounts. Restricting local administrative privileges can help limit installation of RATs
Learn more:
and other unwanted applications.
HAFNIUM targeting Exchange Servers with 0-day exploits | Microsoft Security Blog (3/2/2021) 9. Educate users about malware threats, such as RATs, that can propagate through email as well as through
Web shell attacks continue to rise - Microsoft Security (2/11/2021) web downloads and search engines.
Ghost in the shell: Investigating web shell attacks - Microsoft Security (2/4/2021)
Learn more:
Use attack surface reduction rules to prevent malware infection | Microsoft Docs (6/23/2021)
Turn on network protection | Microsoft Docs (6/14/2021)
Block potentially unwanted applications with Microsoft Defender Antivirus | Microsoft Docs (6/02/2021)
21 Use attack surface reduction rules to prevent malware infection | Microsoft Docs 22 Azure Active Directory security defaults | Microsoft Docs Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 37
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Malicious Domain proliferation and How domains are being used Domains can be a mechanism to build resiliency
into the infrastructure
threat mitigation for malware
domains Cybercriminals are now routinely adding domain
The number of domains available on the internet A malicious domain is often used as a destination
generating algorithms (DGAs) to their malware,
has mushroomed over the past several years. This to which malware victims are directed. In this way,
providing a fallback mechanism for when hard-
Any domain used in the pursuit of cybercrime can includes country code top-level domains (cTLDs) the domain both initiates the establishment of a
coded malicious domains are seized by law
be considered malicious. Malicious domains can such as .uk, .ca, and .cn; generic top-level domains communications channel with the victim and reveals
enforcement, for example. To utilize DGAs, malicious
be legitimate sites which have been compromised (gTLDs) such as .com, .net, and org; and over 1,200 the infected victim’s location. Knowing a victim’s
software includes code to generate lists of domains
to enable criminals to host malicious content on new gTLDs that were introduced into the Domain location is important as cybercriminals use a myriad
built using random characters or strings that change
subdomains, or they can be entirely fraudulent Name System (DNS) in 2013. Due to the sheer of methods to disseminate their malware but are
based on the day, time, and year. For example,
infrastructure set up for the commission of a crime. number of top-level domains, and the growing unable to anticipate where it will ultimately be
on Friday, June 4, 2022, the DGA might generate
Cybercriminals use malicious domains for three ecosystem of domain name registries, domain successfully downloaded. Therefore, cybercriminals
three domains, such as ahu3rrfsirraqrty.com,
primary functions: information transmission, location registrars, and domain registration service providers, engineer their malware to “phone home” to a
hyrssgu5oqr4cetc.com, and wkcclsoqqpcaty.com,
obfuscation, and building resiliency against those mitigating cyber threats from malicious domains malicious domain. Newly infected computers
and the malware would attempt to contact those
seeking to interfere with their criminal activities. has been further complicated. Uniformity in cyber immediately reach out to such domains, effectively
domains in that order. The use of DGAs increases
threat mitigation across the ecosystem is critical. “announcing” their location via IP addresses. There
the cost and complexity of disrupting cybercriminal
Domains are used for data exfiltration, controlling There is movement in this direction as evidenced are two primary ways domains are used for these
communications infrastructure, requiring disruptors
ransomware communication, hosting phishing by recent language incorporated into the Internet purposes in malware:
to monitor hundreds of thousands of potentially
pages, and providing control to malware. They Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
malicious domains, whereas the cybercriminal needs
are also used as email domains to create visually (ICANN) agreements with registries, which includes Domains aid in obfuscating and hiding the
only one of them.
identical imposter email aliases for deception. terms of use that define and prohibit illegal activity, cybercriminals’ location and identity
Fraudulent domains can use trademarks to deceive and a requirement for registries to develop their Domains directly added to malware (or “hard-
customers or provide a platform for fraud, such as own anti-abuse policy and monitor and address coded” domains) and incorporated into the
fraudulent technical support sites. abusive activity. communications infrastructure can effectively hide
the cybercriminal’s true location. The cybercriminal
sets up a domain as a proxy, or “stepping-stone,”
which redirects the communications with a victim
to another domain or IP. This process can consist
of multiple “hops” spanning domains associated
with top-level domains from around the world. It is
common for cybercriminals to use fictitious names,
emails, and addresses and pay for the domains with
stolen credit cards or non-traceable digital currency.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 38
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Disrupting malicious domain Disrupting third-party-hosted domains through Pursuing the appropriate remedy is an essential The next big threat: “Forever”
legal action component of an effectively disruptive legal action.
infrastructure (blockchain) domains
Given that cybercriminals are increasingly deploying A well-crafted injunction that relies on the broad
Disrupting domains on Microsoft-hosted services Blockchain domains are an emerging threat outside
private technical infrastructure, including malicious equitable authority of federal courts enables
Cybercriminals are now increasingly abusing of regulation. Over the last two years, the adaptation
domains, to carry out a wide range of cybercrime, plaintiffs to obtain flexible court orders permitting
Microsoft and third-party clouds as well as the of blockchain technology has skyrocketed across
it is incumbent on organizations and individuals them to exercise control over the cybercrime
services information workers and consumers use for many business verticals. Real-life applications of
to establish the necessary legal and technical infrastructure. To obtain such relief, plaintiffs
day-to-day collaboration (such as email). Microsoft blockchain technology range from supply chain
capabilities to disrupt this infrastructure through frequently invoke statutes that support seizure of
takes numerous steps to reduce cloud hosting management, identity management, real estate
legal actions. physical devices, computers, and servers used for
abuse. We proactively detect abuse of the Microsoft contracts, and domain infrastructure. In recent
criminal purposes. Malicious domains engaged in
cloud at the hosting source and neutralize it before years, we have observed blockchain domains
In recent years, the private sector has used a variety criminal activity can also be subject to seizure under
attacks start or scale; we act on detections in our integrated into cybercriminal infrastructure and
of legal theories to pursue disruption through various federal statutes and equitable theories. In
services (as in Office 365 email) and route this operations. We first observed this on a large scale
civil actions in federal court. Criminal statutes several civil cases, federal courts have granted this
knowledge to internal services that can neutralize when investigating the Necurs botnet that reigned
directed at hacking and unlawful access frequently sort of injunction for violations of the CFAA, the
the threat; we act on customer and third-party terror worldwide for years with its ability to send
provide a civil cause of action to target malicious Electronic Communications Privacy Act, the Lanham
reports; and we notify third-party industry partners malicious spam, often with ransomware payloads.
infrastructure. In particular, the Computer Fraud and Act, and common law claims. These legal claims
of abuse on their cloud, detected by using our Necurs contained a robust backup system, which
Abuse Act (CFAA), the Wiretap Act, and the Stored also support court orders that direct transfer or
security services, so they can act to neutralize it incorporated a DGA. In one of its DGA versions,
Communications Act are frequently asserted legal disablement of domains and/or IP addresses. In this
at their hosting source. In the three-month period Necurs produced 2,048 new domains from 43
theories. Very frequently trademark theories under scenario, courts grant the transfer or disablement
between May and July 2021, we disabled roughly different TLDs approximately every 30 days,
the Lanham Act23 are asserted as cybercriminals of malicious infrastructure to a private plaintiff’s
15,850 phishing sites hosted on Azure. We closely including the blockchain domain TLD “.bit.”
leverage trusted brands to deceive victims. In many control, and away from the control of defendants,
monitor abuse and evaluate new ways to detect and
cases, infringing domains provide the critical part of which effectively disrupts the technical capability of
neutralize hosting of malicious sites
malicious technical infrastructure and often include cybercriminals to launch attacks and inflict harm.
wholesale counterfeit reproduction of legitimate
content to confuse victims and advance criminal
schemes.
Blockchain domains are an emerging
FPO
threat outside of regulation.
23 15 U.S.C. §§ 1125(a)-(c) Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 39
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Unlike traditional domains that are purchased Blockchain domains work differently and pose Big threats using blockchain domains Investigating blockchain domains provides a unique
through internet registrars operating through challenges from both a utilization and disruption The threat landscape of criminal infrastructure challenge because there is no central WHOIS
the ICANN-regulated DNS system, blockchain standpoint. Blockchain domains function either is constantly shifting to avoid detection and registration database tracking who registered the
domains are not governed by any centralized body, through software/browser plug-in or proxy disruption. Within the past year, some of the bigger domain and when. Fortunately, some blockchain
limiting the opportunity for abuse reporting and resolution services. The challenge for cybercriminals threat actors on the internet have started utilizing DNS providers like Emercoin have provided access
enforcement disruptions. with respect to blockchain domains is getting the blockchain domains as part of their infrastructure. to a block explorer tool,25 which enables a search for
most updated IP address from the blockchain to the Trickbot, the notorious banking trojan which has domain names, transaction hashes, and other values
Traditionally, blockchain domain purchases are computer trying to resolve the blockchain domain to evolved its business model into providing access that might be stored in the blockchain. The Emercoin
made through a crypto wallet with cryptocurrency an IP address. Because blockchain domains operate to high-value targets in the ransomware space, blockchain is pseudo-anonymous but can reveal
from a blockchain DNS provider. Crypto wallets outside the normal DNS channels, malware authors started using “.bazar” domains provided by some interesting information about a blockchain
utilize asymmetric encryption, which involves both a must include additional resolution instructions Emercoin blockchain DNS. The more recent threat, domain, such as IP addresses and transaction dates.
private and public key for the blockchain transaction. for infected victims. These instructions are usually Bazarloader, which has connections to Trickbot,
After the transaction has been executed, the domain hard-coded into the malware and point the infected started deploying a unique version of its DGA
name, domain IP, and transaction hash are recorded system to a blockchain proxy resolution service IP. that uses “.bazar” domains. This trend of threats
into the blockchain. Moving forward, the only entity leveraging blockchain domains as infrastructure
that can make changes to the IP recorded on the Over the years, there have been several projects with the means to create an undisputable criminal
blockchain is the person with the wallet and private on the internet to operate free unregulated DNS network should be taken seriously.
key who made the initial transaction to purchase the and support the resolution of blockchain domains.
domain. Most recently, the OpenNic project, which operates
under the mission statement of “DNS neutrality and
provide uncensored DNS access,” took on the task
of resolving “.bit” crypto domains. Several years into
the project, because of reported widespread abuse
of “.bit” domains, the OpenNic project decided to
stop resolving “.bit” domains.24
24 https://www.namecoin.org/2019/07/30/opennic-does-right-thing-shuts-down-centralized-inproxy.html 25 https://explorer1.emercoin.com/nvs Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 40
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Countering blockchain domains might not be as Blockchain domains have become a preferred choice for cybercrime infrastructure
difficult as you think
The weakness in blockchain domains is the need
for third-party proxy services or browser plug-ins
to resolve blockchain domains to an IP. Disabling or
blocking the blockchain proxy resolution services
and disabling browser plug-ins will disable the
ability for blockchain domain resolution. Many threat
intelligence vendors provide malicious URL feeds,
which sometimes include blockchain resolution
proxies or the blockchain domain itself.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 41
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Adversarial The adversarial ML threat 2. Grounded in real attacks on ML systems: Intentional failure modes in ML
We seeded this framework with a curated set
matrix
Microsoft has incorporated AI- and ML-specific
machine of vulnerabilities and adversary behaviors
Microsoft worked with MITRE to create the security practices into its Security Development
that Microsoft and MITRE vetted to be
learning Adversarial ML Threat Matrix because we believe the Lifecycle (SDL) to protect Microsoft products and
effective against production ML systems,
first step in empowering security teams to defend services against these attacks. In addition to threat
enabling security analysts to focus on realistic
against attacks on ML systems is to have a framework detection and mitigation development work and
threats. We also incorporated learnings from
Machine learning (ML) is an artificial intelligence (AI) that systematically organizes the techniques automation, we have published guidance on steps
Microsoft’s vast experience in this space into
technique that can be used in numerous applications, employed by malicious adversaries in subverting customers can take to build defense in depth into
the framework. For instance, we found that
including cybersecurity. In responsible ML innovation, ML systems. We hope that the security community their own AI and ML systems.
model stealing is not the end goal of the
data scientists and developers build, train, and
can use the tabulated tactics and techniques to
attacker but in fact leads to more insidious
deploy ML models to understand, protect, and The centerpiece of the materials we’ve published is
bolster their monitoring strategies around their
model evasion. We also found that when
control data and processes to build trusted solutions. called Failure Modes in Machine Learning,26 which
organizations’ mission-critical ML systems.
attacking an ML system, attackers use a
1. Primary audience is security analysts:
lays out the terminology we developed jointly with
combination of traditional techniques like
However, adversaries can attack these ML-driven We think that securing ML systems is an the Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society at
phishing and lateral movement alongside
systems. The methods underpinning the production infosec problem. The goal of the Adversarial Harvard University. It includes vocabulary that can
adversarial ML techniques.
ML systems are systematically vulnerable to a new ML Threat Matrix is to position attacks on be used to describe intentional failures caused by
class of vulnerabilities across the ML supply chain ML systems in a framework where security an adversary attempting to alter results or steal an
collectively known as “adversarial ML.” Adversaries analysts can orient themselves in these new algorithm, as well as vocabulary for unintentional
can exploit these vulnerabilities to manipulate AI and upcoming threats. The matrix is structured failures such as a system that produces results that
systems and alter their behavior to serve a malicious like the ATT&CK framework, owing to its might be unsafe.
end goal.
wide adoption among the security analyst
community. This way, security analysts have a
familiar framework to learn about threats to
ML systems, which are inherently different from
traditional attacks on corporate networks.
26 https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/security/engineering/failure-modes-in-machine-learning Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 42
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Attacks on ML models
Attack Description Example
Evasion attack Attacker modifies the Self-driving cars
query in a way that causes By manipulating a stop sign, or the environment
a model misclassification. observed by the car’s image recognition system,
the adversary causes a model misclassification.
In this way, a self-driving car could be made to
ignore the stop sign.
Poisoning attack Attacker contaminates Critical infrastructure systems
the training phase of ML By submitting antivirus software as malware,
systems to get intended an adversary can force its misclassification as
result. The attacker wants malicious thereby eliminating the use of the
to misclassify specific antivirus software on client systems. This could
examples to cause specific leave critical infrastructure systems open to
actions to be taken or attack.
omitted.
Membership Attacker can infer if a Healthcare information
Inference given data record was part An adversary could look at a model trained on a
of the model’s training body of data consisting of people with a specific
dataset or not. surgical procedure. By knowing that a particular
individual’s data was in the training set, an
adversary would then know the individual had the
surgical procedure. This privacy violation could
then be leveraged publicly.
Model Stealing Attacker is able to recover Finance algorithms
the model through Through model queries, an adversary could
carefully crafted queries. reconstruct the potential outputs of the ML
model. This could be used to adversely affect
proprietary algorithms designed for high
frequency stock trading in a particular market.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 43
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Attacker evasions Sophisticated black-box evasion attacks against ML model/data poisoning As we’ve seen with security research into past
ML models have been demonstrated repeatedly vulnerabilities,27 a pronounced uptick in research
An evasion attack is an exploratory attack against We are seeing a trend shift in adversarial ML
by white-hat researchers by using algorithms that publications is soon followed by active exploitation.
an ML model to cause an integrity violation. From security research. While in past years there was a
iteratively determine what input will cause an In anticipation of such a shift to focus on data
a system’s security perspective, it is instructive to focus on highly visible model evasion attacks where
integrity violation. Today, however, threat actors in poisoning attacks, Microsoft continues to focus
consider black-box evasion attacks, in which an the fragility of some ML models could be easily
the wild may also attempt evasion of ML systems on designing threat detections and mitigations
attacker may have no specific knowledge of the demonstrated, the focus of security researchers
in some domains, but usually do so through to protect ML models and their datasets against
inner workings of the ML model but instead effects is broadening to include less noticeable attacks.
manual rather than algorithmic means and do not these threats. Mitigations in this space can also be
change by submitting inputs and observing the For example, in data poisoning attacks, the target
necessarily focus exclusively on ML as the evasion beneficial to detecting non-malicious training data
corresponding system output. This threat model is the training data that the ML models are built
target. For example, content moderation filters are drift, giving data scientists greater insight into the
is common to many AI systems hosted as a cloud from. As new data is aggregated and incorporated
bypassed by mischievous or economically motivated quality of their data over time and highlighting
service or on a consumer device, for example, and is into a dataset for training, it becomes increasingly
users by obscuring payload content in creative anomalies for investigation.
a concern for models in finance, healthcare, defense, important to validate that new training data has not
ways. Security products that include antimalware or
fraud, and security. been compromised. We have evidence of customer
antiphishing models are evaded by adversaries using
ML model compromise resulting from adversarial
several obfuscation techniques. That these target
contamination of training data which, when left
systems rely on ML is not necessarily a consideration
undetected, becomes an equally trusted part of
in these practical manual evasion attacks.
existing training datasets. Without automation
measuring for statistical drift in growing datasets,
Whether or not an adversary is present in your
these types of attacks largely go undetected until an
business domain, the risk of adversaries evading
ML model has a critical failure.
an ML model exists in every domain. An ML model
is an imperfect summary of a dataset, and as
such, models have intrinsic failure modes even
when trained on an ideal dataset. It is generally
understood that the feasibility of evasion is a The risk of adversaries evading an
property of all ML models, rather than a failure
ML model exists in every domain.
mode to which only a few are susceptible to. These
integrity violations may rarely be encountered
during nominal use of the ML model but can be
readily discovered by an adversary who is explicitly
optimizing for the worst-case conditions necessary
to cause them.
27 Such as MD5, SHA1, SSLv2/3, and TLS 1.0 Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 44
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
What we’re doing to stay ahead Based on learnings from internal and external AI risk management
engagements, Counterfit is designed to be flexible in
of the curve
three key ways:
Performing security assessments of production
1. Environment agnostic: It can help assess AI
AI systems is not easy. Microsoft surveyed 28
models hosted in any cloud environment, on-
organizations,28 spanning Fortune 500 companies,
premises, or on the edge.
governments, non-profits, and small and medium-
2. Model agnostic: The tool abstracts the
sized businesses, to understand the current
internal workings of AI models so that security
processes in place to secure AI systems. We found
professionals can focus on security assessment.
that 25 out of 28 businesses indicated they don’t
3. Strives to be data agnostic: It works on AI
have the right tools in place to secure their AI
models using text, images, or tabular input,
systems and that security professionals are looking
and we continue to add data types.
for specific guidance in this space.
Learn more:
To address the growing needs of adversarial ML,
Our approach to responsible AI at Microsoft
Microsoft released Counterfit, an open-source
tool to help assess risk by allowing users to attack GitHub – Azure/counterfit: a CLI that provides a
generic automation layer for assessing the security of
their own AI/ML. This tool was developed out of
ML models Security is one part of a larger emphasis in a burgeoning market
our own need to assess Microsoft’s AI systems for
called “AI risk management” and includes “model operations”—
vulnerabilities and proactively secure AI services, AI security risk assessment using Counterfit | Microsoft
ensuring that your AI system is reliable, accurate and available. It also
in accordance with our responsible AI principles29 Security Blog (5/3/2021) includes “responsible AI” with fairness, ethics, transparency and all
and Responsible AI Strategy in Engineering (RAISE) Adversarial Machine Learning – Industry Perspectives the legal ramifications of having AI systems behave responsibly. This
initiative. Counterfit started as a corpus of attack (3/19/2021) “security” element also deserves attention and is an important piece in
rounding out a risk management posture.
scripts written specifically to target individual AI
models and then grew into a generic automation
tool to attack multiple AI systems at scale. Today, we
routinely use Counterfit as part of our AI red team
operations.
28 2002.05646.pdf (arxiv.org) (March 2021) 29 Responsible AI principles from Microsoft Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 45
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction The cybercrime economy and services Ransomware and extortion Phishing and other malicious email Malware Malicious domains Adversarial machine learning
Standards for addressing AI and ML are increasingly integrated into all AI security cannot be considered in isolation of Learn more:
types of systems, including critical and safety existing risk-based security, privacy, and governance
security of AI systems Responsible AI principles from Microsoft
infrastructure, resulting in new security threats foundations, which can address many of the
The prevalent use of AI and ML across industry Threat Modeling AI/ML Systems and Dependencies
unique to the use of AI systems and highly threats that arise using AI systems. For example,
– Security documentation | Microsoft Docs,
sectors, an emerging regulatory landscape, and
undesirable consequences of attacks. Such using standards such as those for an information
(11/11/2019)
widespread mistrust or misunderstanding in the use
consequences can include the detrimental security management system (ISO/IEC 27001) and
of these technologies has led to an increased need AI/ML Pivots to the Security Development Lifecycle
performance of a chatbot, denial of essential a privacy information management system (ISO/
for standards to define good practice and provide Bug Bar – Security documentation | Microsoft Docs
services, theft of intellectual property, or even IEC 27701) can help an organization to implement
guidance to improve trust and market adoption. (11/11/2019)
physical danger to humans. In some instances, processes and controls to address security and
The International Organization for Standardization Failure Modes in Machine Learning – Security
security attacks on AI systems have already caused privacy risks associated with its objectives and
(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical documentation | Microsoft Docs (11/11/2019)
significant issues. activities, including security threats to AI systems.
Commission (IEC) are developing AI standards,
In addition to these existing practices, this evolved
including defining key terminology and concepts
threat landscape will require new guidance, good
for AI and ML, risk management, governance
practices, and organizational and technical measures
implications, data quality, and various topics related
to help organizations protect their AI systems.
to trustworthiness. Also under development is a
Effective security measures are a vital component
certifiable management system standard for AI,
of responsible development and deployment of AI
which will guide organizations to adopt a risk-based
systems. Microsoft is engaged in new standards
approach to responsibly use and develop AI systems
work that has been initiated to provide guidance for
as well as to demonstrate accountability and their
addressing security threats and failures in AI and ML.
duty of care toward stakeholders.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 46
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
CHAPTER 3
Nation state threats
Introduction
Tracking nation state threats
What we're seeing
Analysis of nation state activity this year
Private sector offensive actors
Comprehensive protections required
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 47
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Attackers increase use of deception to
INTRODUCTION:
pursue national objectives
JOHN LAMBERT, DISTINGUISHED ENGINEER AND VICE PRESIDENT, MICROSOFT THREAT INTELLIGENCE CEN TER
The last year has been marked by significant historic geopolitical events and unforeseen challenges that have NATION
changed the way organizations approach daily operations. During this time, nation state actors have largely
STATE ACTORS
maintained their operations at a consistent pace while creating new tactics and techniques to evade detection
APPEAR TO BE
and increase the scale of their attacks.
INCREASING
Major cybersecurity events, like the SolarWinds nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and think These sophisticated attackers continue to focus
THE SCALE
attacks by NOBELIUM and on-premises Exchange tanks for traditional espionage or surveillance on effective techniques that help them maintain
Server attacks by HAFNIUM, and attacks by multiple objectives. The victims of attacks often have stealth and access. We have seen continuing attacks
AND VOLUME
other actors have focused our collective attention on information relevant to an adversary government’s on traditional security hygiene elements as well as
securing our supply chains. Nation state actors and intelligence needs, which is why so many government focus on developing and refining new, breakthrough OF ATTACKS
many cybercrime operations have focused efforts on agencies and think tanks are attacked. However, private attacks targeting the supplier ecosystem in order
exposing security vulnerabilities among their suppliers industry’s role in supporting remote workers, increased to attack downstream customers. Well-established TO EVADE
or discovering unpatched systems that organizations healthcare services, COVID-19 vaccine research, and spear phishing and password spray campaigns
DETECTION.
relied on for continuity of business during this unusual COVID-19 vaccine distribution have also made them by nation state actors continue to be successful
year. These recent events have demonstrated the more common targets for these sophisticated actors against organizations that have not yet implemented
increasing importance in maintaining current security seeking information for their government’s national multifactor authentication (MFA) or other protections
updates in all deployed systems as the most effective security or intelligence purposes. Our increased against this common tactic. However, as more
way to protect against rapidly evolving threats. reliance on the global telecommunications backbone organizations invest in securing their accounts, the
and virtual private network (VPN)/virtual private server success rate of these techniques will decline, and
The Microsoft Threat Intelligence Center (VPS) infrastructure for remote workers gave malicious detection of the attacks will increase. In response,
(MSTIC) and the Digital Security Unit (DSU) have actors new vectors to gain access to targeted private nation state actors appear to be increasing the scale
observed that most nation state actors continue networks that were scrambling to support new ways of and volume of these attacks to evade detection
to focus operations and attacks on government doing business. and improve the likelihood of success across
agencies, intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), multiple targets. This volume-oriented approach to
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 4488
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
compromising credentials will continue to be a refining their techniques by leveraging new exploits are often unique, prompting deeper analysis and Nation state notifications
useful technique if poorly secured accounts are against security weaknesses and unpatched systems creation of customized detections. Understanding
When a customer, whether it’s an organization
available as targets. Attacks against unpatched of common supply chain vendors in order to gain these TTPs also helps Microsoft better understand
or individual account holder, is targeted or
third-party software or on-premises infrastructure access to and collect information from downstream downstream actors such as cybercriminals and
compromised by nation state activities that
will likely become more pervasive and become more customers. Spear phishing and password spray smaller nation states who often copy or reuse these
Microsoft tracks, we deliver a nation state
easily exploited by nation state and cybercrime attacks show no sign of slowing as the common methods. DSU focuses on the victims identified
notification (NSN) to the customer. Over the past
actors. Postponing installation of security updates method for reconnaissance and infiltration, by MSTIC, connecting the victims of the attack to
three years, Microsoft has delivered over 20,500
or incomplete knowledge of deployed systems and increasing the importance of implementing end-to- political objectives and stated intelligence goals
NSNs. The charts and graphs in this chapter are
their patch state will leave organizations vulnerable end MFA across accounts. The information Microsoft of governments to help Microsoft provide fuller
derived from Microsoft’s NSN process.
to sudden large-scale attacks as they scramble provides in this chapter captures much of the activity context to the world about why these nation state
to identify affected assets and catch up to a fully we have seen targeting our customers globally in attacks occur.
Countering nation state activity
patched state. Running networks with unsupported the past year and captures the trends we anticipate
software, or software that is no longer updated, nation state actors will continue to use in the next We focus on nation state activities regardless of Nation state actors are generally well-resourced
increases risk exponentially. Organizations must year. We recommend you use this information as a platform, targeted victim, or geographical region, and capable adversaries. As noted above, they are
maintain comprehensive asset inventory, patch state guide to understanding the tactics and techniques and we maintain visibility and active threat hunting often pursuing intelligence collection against targets
awareness, and thorough backup and containment that these sophisticated actors may use to target worldwide to write better detections for our of interest to their governments. Our relentless
plans to be resilient against sophisticated attacks. your organizations so you can more effectively customers. We also analyze why nation state actors pursuit of these adversaries and our continuous
Adversaries will continue to evolve new techniques implement proactive defense. are pursuing particular victims, sectors, or regions. development of new capabilities to detect and deter
to target and compromise corporate resources Putting it all together, the information presented malicious activity supports our commitment to
requiring a comprehensive “assume breach” Tracking nation here provides a snapshot of our defensive efforts customer protection. We are constantly improving
mentality that extends beyond basic hygiene needs on behalf of our affected customers. It is important our capability to understand nation state actors
state threats
and MFA and into a holistic set of Zero Trust security to note that even if a particular industry sector and their victims to help bring better context and
principles. Applying a Zero Trust security model32 will or geographic region is not represented in the understanding to our customers.
become increasingly critical in protecting corporate following information, nation state activity spans
Microsoft tracks nation state activities to protect
identities, devices, applications, data, networks, and nearly every industry sector and geographic region.
our customers and our platforms and services.
infrastructure against sophisticated threats. In other words, protections against these tactics are
We use a variety of metrics and sophisticated
critical for every organization and individual. Our
data integration techniques to better understand
Looking forward, we know that adversarial intelligence is impacted by the degree to which our
targeting, motivations, and customer impact. MSTIC
governments will continue with their intelligence products and platforms are utilized in a particular
focuses on nation state actor activities because
collection objectives, as well as explore the political geography or sector.
these tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs)
boundaries of acceptable behavior in cyberspace. As
often have significant impact on our customers and
a result, we expect nation state actors to continue
32 Zero Trust Security Model and Framework | Microsoft Security Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 49
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Our approach 2. Leveraging technology 4. Digital Crimes Unit Guide to the nation state actors
Microsoft’s cumulative knowledge of the global One of Microsoft’s unique resources in the fight
discussed in this report
Microsoft uses a five-pronged approach to disrupt
threat landscape enables our products and services against nation state actors is the Digital Crimes
nation state actors—providing direct customer Throughout this chapter, we cite examples of nation
to constantly create and update new security Unit (DCU). Using litigation to seize domains and
notifications, leveraging technology to detect and state actors to provide a deeper view into attack
product detections, helping to protect and defend assets used by nation state actors against Microsoft
defend, taking technical action against malicious targets, techniques, and analysis of motivations.
against nation state activities at scale. These customers, the DCU has been instrumental in
operations, pursuing legal action, and participating Microsoft identifies nation state activities by
collective defenses represent the most effective shutting down those attack vectors. These cases
in public policy discourse—and each one plays an chemical element names, just some of which are
method to counter nation state threats, as they have led to the takedown of hundreds of domains
important role in our commitment to protecting our shown in the following table together with the
are informed by the extensive threat intelligence and the protection of thousands of customers, and
customers and the ecosystem at large. countries of origin from which the actors operate.
resources built into each product and enabled by Microsoft remains one of the only companies willing
This small sample of the total nation state actors
world-class engineering. to pursue legal action against nation state actors
1. Empowering customers
tracked by Microsoft represents those that were
in order to seize infrastructure and disrupt attacks.
Microsoft leverages its NSN process to inform
most active in the last year and made most effective
3. Taking technical action against malicious Lessons learned from the cases are shared with
customers of targeting or compromise from
use of the tactics detailed in this chapter.
operations Microsoft engineering teams to help improve our
nation state actors we track, providing actionable
From time to time, Microsoft will have sufficient operational and technical disruption capabilities.
information for customers to rapidly respond and Microsoft also tracks and investigates many
information to warrant a one-time deletion or
protect themselves. Microsoft also provides alerts malicious activities that are either new or unknown
shutdown of infrastructure or assets associated with 5. Informing public discourse and policy
to industry sectors and customer segments to help in origin to develop a full understanding of the
a nation state attacker. By taking proactive action Microsoft uses its voice to raise awareness about
raise awareness of malicious activity and guidance tactics, techniques, and objectives.
against malicious infrastructure, the actor loses nation state activities, highlighting the context and
on how to respond.
visibility, capability, and access across a range of impacts of the incidents and sharing context about
assets previously under their control, forcing them attacks and why they matter to the world. This helps
to rebuild. drive a broad discussion about what can be done
to combat malicious nation state activities across
government entities, NGOs, enterprises, academia,
and the public. Talking publicly about nation state
When we take proactive action against malicious attacks is an important part of deterrence.
infrastructure, the actor loses visibility, capability,
and access across a range of assets previously
under their control, forcing them to rebuild.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 50
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Sample of nation state actors and their activities
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 51
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
What we're Iran has been the only nation state actor willing Nation state actors from North Korea added a Although SolarWinds and the Exchange vulnerability
to regularly engage in destructive attacks, mostly third motive to their cyberattacks: monetary gain. were the two main cybersecurity stories of the
seeing against Israel. These cyberattacks happened within North Korea targets companies in cryptocurrency year, Iran and North Korea also used similar tactics
a political environment in which both countries trade or related research, likely seeking either to of targeting IT providers to find creative ways to
were trading blows just short of military strikes, steal cryptocurrency or intellectual property. North exploit their real targets. For example, North Korean
Nation state targets
including attacks on one another’s cargo ships. Korea’s economy is never strong, but the COVID-19 actor ZINC created online personas of apparent
In the 2020 Microsoft Digital Defense Report, With tensions already so high, the decision to use pandemic coming after years of UN sanctions has cybersecurity experts, including websites and social
we identified common aims (espionage, cyber for destructive attacks was less of a strategic pushed it to its worst state in a generation, forcing media pages, and used these personas to approach
disruption/destruction) and common techniques leap for Iran than it would have been for North North Korea to seek to find money by any means experts in cybersecurity vulnerabilities in an attempt
(reconnaissance, credential harvesting, malware, Korea, Russia, or China. While nations other than necessary. Although Iranian nation state actors to get the researchers they corresponded with to
and virtual private network (VPN) exploits) prevalent Iran mostly refrained from destructive attacks, they frequently used ransomware attacks, Microsoft open content that would have downloaded exploits
among major nation state cyber actors. These did continue to compromise victims that would be assesses that the ransomware was used more for onto their machines. While this was not a direct
aims and techniques were as prevalent this year prime candidates for destructive attacks if tensions covering the tracks of the attackers than for profit. attack on an IT company like SolarWinds, it did
as the year before. Tried-and-true methods such increased to the point where governments made represent an attempt to indirectly find avenues to
as large-scale spear-phishing campaigns were strategic decisions to escalate cyber warfare. Targeting of IT companies is the big story of last compromise North Korea’s actual targets by going
still valuable tools in the kits of hackers. However, year through the experts responsible for finding ways to
attackers worldwide, either affiliated directly with The “Most targeted sectors” chart in this chapter A more revolutionary change, one common among protect them.
governments or with more loose connections, are section shows that nearly 80% of those targeted all of the Big Four nation state cyber programs, has
continuing to perform research against targets in were either in government, NGOs, or think tanks. been the decision to target IT service providers For more information on supply chain security, see
order to be more convincing in an attack, develop Think tanks often serve as policy incubators and in order to more successfully exploit victims the Supply chain, IoT, and OT security chapter of this
new techniques that have not been seen before, implementers, with strong ties to current and former downstream who receive services from those report.
or even mimic criminal behavior in an attempt to government officials and programs. Threat actors IT providers. The most glaring examples of the
obfuscate intent and objective. Microsoft responds can and do exploit the connections between the use of this kind of strategy from the last year are
by also working to improve our ability to keep up more traditional NGO community and government the Russian SolarWinds attacks and the Chinese
with the changes. organizations to position themselves to gain insights exploitation of a vulnerability in on-premises
into national policy plans and intentions. As noted, Microsoft Exchange servers. These attacks are both
Espionage more prevalent than destructive it’s the think tanks with ideas relevant to current or covered in detail in the sections on Russia and
attacks future government policy or political objectives that China.
The two main goals of nation state actors have not put these organizations into the line of sight for
changed either. In the last year, espionage, and intelligence operations. When traditional NGOs have
more specifically, intelligence collection, has been similar information, we also see them as an objective
a far more common goal than destructive attacks. for nation state actors.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 52
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Most targeted countries (July 2020-June 2021) Most targeted sectors (July 2020-June 2021) Consumer versus enterprise targets (July 2020-June 2021)
Organizations in the United States remained the target of most of the Every threat actor we tracked this year targeted entities within the It is likely that threat actors thought consumer email accounts could
observed activity this year. We also noted targeting increases consistent government sector. NOBELIUM, NICKEL, THALLIUM, and PHOSPHORUS be an easier way to gain access to targeted networks during the
with increasing geopolitical tensions between nations. Russia-based were the most active against this sector from the Big Four threat global move to remote work. Separate from enterprise targets and the
NOBELIUM raised the number of Ukrainian customers impacted from countries. Government sector targeting largely focused on ministries industries they represented, consumer accounts received the second
six last fiscal year to more than 1,200 this year by heavily targeting of foreign affairs and other global government entities involved in highest number of notifications this year. THALLIUM and PHOSPHORUS
Ukrainian government interests involved in rallying support against a international affairs. (This chart excludes consumer accounts and depicts invested heavily in spear-phishing campaigns targeting these accounts.
build-up of Russian troops along Ukraine’s border. This year marked only enterprise targets’ corresponding sectors.)
a near quadrupling in targeting of Israeli entities, a result exclusively
of Iranian actors, who focused on Israel as tensions sharply escalated
between the adversaries.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 53
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Critical infrastructure versus noncritical infrastructure targets threat actors displayed the most interest and Russia-based threat actors of displaying Russia’s interest in conducting operation for access and
From July 2020 to June 2021, critical infrastructures were not the focal accounted for the least in targeting entities in the critical infrastructure intelligence collection versus targeting a critical infrastructure for
point according to the NSN information that was tracked. China-based sector. Russian NOBELIUM’s cyber operations are a perfect example potential disruption operations.
Targeting critical versus noncritical infrastructures (PPD-21)(July 2020–June 2021)
Russia’s targeting of critical infrastructures China’s targeting of critical infrastructures Iran’s targeting of critical infrastructures
North Korea’s targeting of critical infrastructures Combination of China, Iran, North Korea,
and Russia’s targeting of critical infrastructures
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 54
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Compromised versus targeted success rate Activity origins Most active nation state activity groups
Success rates varied widely from threat group to threat group. Some Like the “compromised versus targeted” section above, the data in this
The following section depicts the frequency of attacks by country of
groups, like North Korean THALLIUM, had a low success rate, because section is heavily affected by the tactics chosen by the attackers. If one
origin, measured in the number of NSNs generated from attacks by
they used strategies like large-scale spear-phishing campaigns that group attempts a password spray attack on a hundred targets and
each actor. Russia-based threat activity dominated this year, driven
rely more on using a wide net than a surgical strike. Password sprays successfully compromises one, while another group surgically focuses
by NOBELIUM’s large-scale targeting. North Korea–based actors also
are another example of a tactic with a low success rate, but where the on only one victim that it compromises, they have both had the same
employed a strategy of ubiquitous targeting that earned North Korea
attackers understand the success rate will be low. Other groups use very number of successes. However, the first group will appear as the more
the second highest percentage of notifications.
focused attacks that succeed much more often. HAFNIUM, for example, “active” group, because it has attacked a hundred targets. The top three
succeeded in 43% of its attacks. NICKEL succeeded at an astonishing groups in this list all make use of high-fail-rate tactics. NOBELIUM, in
Country of activity origin
rate of over 90%. The figures below represent an average of different addition to high-success-rate-focused attacks, also makes frequent use
NOBELIUM, and its aggressive targeting of IT service providers and
tactics that are designed to succeed at different rates. The first quarter of low-success password sprays, while THALLIUM and PHOSPHORUS
Western government institutions, catapulted Russia to the top spot for
was extremely high, not necessarily because actors were more successful send spear-phishing emails to large groups. This chart, then, does not
countries where attacks originated this year. That group was responsible
that quarter, but because Microsoft noted less activity stemming from necessarily equate to the most dangerous groups, although it does say
for 92% of the notifications to customers about Russia-based threat
low-success-rate attacks. something about their relative levels of persistence and ubiquity.
activity. The outsized proportion of attacks coming from North Korea is
a result of the strategy taken by threat actors THALLIUM and CERIUM.
Compromise rate (July 2020-June 2021) Most active nation state activity groups (July 2020-June 2021)
These groups rely on large quantities of attacks. While these attacks
have a low percentage of success, because of the high number of
attempts, the groups still manage to successfully infect some victims.
Attacks by country of origin (July 2020-June 2021)
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 55
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Nation state attacker tools It is often the case that nation state actors develop Attack vectors used by nation state malicious actors
The tools used by nation states to compromise and refine new attack techniques and that criminals
victim networks are most frequently the same adopt and further refine them over time. Microsoft
tools used by other malicious actors. To achieve expects tools designed to target and compromise IT
their objectives, nation state actors may create supply chains to enter the mainstream and become
or leverage bespoke malware, construct novel more common, making concepts like Zero Trust
password spray infrastructure, or craft unique architecture a priority from software development
phishing or social engineering campaigns. However, through deployment and updating. Well-funded Nation states are advanced enough to do reconnaissance on their victims and select the
actors like GADOLINIUM are also increasingly nation state actors will continue to create unique attack method that best suits each goal or intended outcome.
turning to use open-source tools33 or common tools to achieve their objectives, but just like any
malware to impact a supply chain, attempt a man- other streamlined organization, are just as likely
in-the-middle attack, or launch a denial-of-service to use common tools where they can to improve
attack. These methods allow malicious actors to efficiency and effectiveness.
obfuscate their actions by hiding in plain sight.
Learn more:
Increased use of open-source tools provides some
Protecting customers from a private-sector offensive
advantages for security professionals responsible
actor using 0-day exploits and DevilsTongue malware
for detecting and defending against these attacks.
| Microsoft Security Blog (7/15/2021)
Increasingly, the same security and computer
hygiene routines that protect from ordinary threats
also help protect from nation states. Training
employees to be skeptical can go a long way to
stopping spear-phishing attacks and thwarting the
common methods that Microsoft sees in the early
stages of a compromise.
33 GADOLINIUM threat actors use cloud services and open source tools in cyberattacks - Securezoo Blog Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 56
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Analysis of in software. The scope, sophistication, and success also developed target-specific capabilities for Russia
of HAFNIUM’s 0-day exploits for on-premises on-premises infrastructure of foreign and defense-
Over the past year, Russia-based activity groups have
nation state Exchange servers in early 2021 and NOBELIUM’s related entities in Europe, marking a shift from the
solidified their position as acute threats to the global
compromise of SolarWinds’ network management predominant cloud-first, cloud-only operations the
activity digital ecosystem by demonstrating adaptability,
software in late 2020 caught the world’s attention, group was known for in 2019 and 2020. Multiple
persistence, a willingness to exploit trusted technical
although the nation state threat extended beyond Iranian actors also likely conducted supply chain
this year relationships, and a facility with anonymization and
those immediate incidents. For one, Russia-based operations, including one in early 2020 that likely
open-source tools that make them increasingly
NOBELIUM and China-based HAFNIUM’s targeting sought intelligence from government agencies
difficult to detect and attribute. They have also
Evolving nation state cybersecurity threats have of on-premises resources and dumping credentials indirectly through IT and engineering services
shown a high tolerance for collateral damage, which
produced a watershed year with an increased in those operations would have allowed them the companies that support US defense and intelligence
leaves anyone with connections to targets of interest
focus on on-premises servers and the exposure of opportunity to seize credentials to access and pivot agencies.
vulnerable to opportunistic targeting.
widespread supply chain vulnerabilities, most acutely to cloud-based resources. Russia-linked STRONTIUM
Activity Other Country Industries Russia
Group Name names of origin targeted
STRONTIUM APT28, Fancy Bear Russia Government, diplomatic and defense entities, think tanks, NGOs, higher
education, defense contractors, IT software and services
NOBELIUM UNC2452 Russia Government, diplomatic and defense entities, IT software and services,
telecommunication, think tanks, NGOs, defense contractors
BROMINE Energetic Bear Russia Government, energy, civil aviation, defense industrial base
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 57
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Abusing supply chain and other trusted technical of the SolarWinds compromise and the targeting In summer and fall 2020, STRONTIUM deployed an NOBELIUM targets by industries/verticals
relationships picture of NOBELIUM’s activity through June 2021 automated password spray/brute forcing tool that (December 2020-Jan 2021)
Russia-based NOBELIUM proved how insidious highlights the tactical shifts and multi-vectored ran through more than a thousand anonymized Tor
and devastating software supply chain attacks can approach the threat group employs to gain access to IPs,38 making it large scale and hard to detect and
be with its compromise of the SolarWinds Orion desired systems. The first chart depicts victims that attribute. The tool was deployed multiple times
software update. Although the group limited follow- were subject to high-touch threat actor exploitation against more than 40 political organizations and
on exploitation to roughly 100 organizations, its that in some cases leveraged the supply chain advocacy groups based in the United States and the
malicious backdoor malware was pushed to roughly backdoor access. The second chart reflects the mass UK in the run-up to, and immediately after, the US
18,000 entities worldwide, leaving those impacted spear-phishing and password spray campaigns the presidential election.
customers vulnerable to further attack. actor used against targeted organizations in the first
half of 2021. We can see NOBELIUM consistently Achieving higher rates of compromise and
NOBELIUM’s operational techniques were much targeted the government, NGO, IT services, and targeting more government organizations
more diverse than just the malicious backdoor professional services sectors (included in “Other” Over the past year, Russia-based groups have
and ranged from password spray and phishing to in the latter chart), but the volume of compromise improved their rates of successful compromise and
NOBELIUM targets by industries/verticals
compromise of third-party providers to facilitate attempts fluctuated in line with the tactical changes. increasingly set their sights on government targets, a
(January-June 2021)
future attacks. The actor targeted cloud solution confluence of trends that could portend more high-
providers (CSPs) and leveraged the backdoor to steal Using a range of techniques to evade detection impact compromises in the year ahead. Year-on-year
a Mimecast private key. NOBELIUM went on to target and attribution comparisons of NSN data depict a marked increase
downstream customers by masquerading as those Russian actors demonstrated varying degrees of in successful compromises, from 21% successful
CSPs and as the legitimate Mimecast app.34 In May, adaptability and security consciousness that helped between July 2019 and June 2020 to 32% since July
the group compromised a US government agency’s them evade attribution and network defenses. 2020. The percentage of government organizations
account at a popular email marketing service, NOBELIUM showed a deep knowledge of common among Russian targets exploded from roughly 3%
cloaking malicious components behind the service’s software tools, network security systems, and cloud last period to 53% since July 2020.
legitimate URL to send a phishing email to more technologies, as well as remediation methods Russian threat actors will follow targets wherever
than 150 diplomatic, international development, and incident response teams use, and they changed their they are, be it in the cloud or on-premises. This past
nonprofit organizations mostly in the United States operations accordingly to maintain persistence.36 year, STRONTIUM pivoted to more on-premises
and across Europe.35 Responder surveillance was a tactic employed by targeting, developing target-specific capabilities
another Russian threat group, YTTRIUM, in the against on-premises infrastructure of foreign policy
NOBELIUM: Variable target picture reflects diversity
Comparing the distribution of NOBELIUM victims past.37 and defense-related entities in Europe. This strategy
of tactics.
identified in the first few months after discovery was a change from the predominant cloud-first,
34 https://www.usnews.com/news/technology/articles/2020-12-24/solarwinds-releases-update-to-flagship-software-after-hack ; https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/technology/mimecast-reveals-source-code-theft-in-solarwinds-hack/ar-BB1eInqC
35 https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2021/05/27/nobelium-cyberattack-nativezone-solarwinds/ 36 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/03/04/goldmax-goldfinder-sibot-analyzing-nobelium-malware/ 37 https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Ldzr0bfGtHc 38 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2020/09/10/strontium-detecting-new-patters-credential-harvesting/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 58
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
cloud-only operations the group was known for port authorities. The healthcare industry was the at organizations on almost every continent this and UK—were on the “unfriendly countries” lists.
throughout 2019 and into 2020. third most targeted sector this period, fueled by period, but they predominantly focused on Microsoft’s observations of Russian threat activity
STRONTIUM’s credential harvesting attempts against organizations based in the United States, followed this past year suggest that intelligence collection
For the first time since August 2018, government organizations developing and testing COVID-19 by Ukraine, UK, and NATO allies and member states was a primary motivation, as we saw data exfiltration
organizations were the most targeted sector for vaccines and treatments40 in the United States, across Europe. On May 14, the Russian government but little evidence of disruptive or destructive activity
Russian threat actors Microsoft tracks, followed by Australia, Canada, Israel, India, and Japan through officially named the United States and Czechia from the groups we track. Gaining information on
think tanks. The government organizations were summer 2020. “unfriendly” countries, while Poland, Lithuania, the policy plans and intentions of those perceived
largely involved in foreign policy and national Latvia, Estonia, UK, Canada, Ukraine, and Australia as adversaries would be standard intelligence
security or defense, although threat actor BROMINE Seeking intelligence on the United States and appeared on a preliminary list leaked in April.41 requirements for the Russian government agencies
concentrated its efforts against US state, county, Europe The top three countries most impacted by Russian to whom the US government attributes much of this
and city governments, as well as aviation and Russian threat actors attempted to access accounts cyber activity this past year—United States, Ukraine, activity.42
Information accessed Operational aim
What lessons might NOBELIUM have
• Sanctions policy Espionage to gain policy insights
learned from the SolarWinds incident? • Defense/intelligence policy
• Russia policy
• COVID-19 information
1. The US Government is still not sure where the red lines are for cyber operations.
• Cyber incident response; threat hunting techniques Intelligence collection to improve
As a sign of the ongoing debate within US and European policy communities about whether
• Assessments of Russian threat actors countermeasures
and how to respond to the SolarWinds breach, in March a former senior adviser to Britain’s • Red Team tools
Government Communications Headquarters cautioned the Biden administration not to react • Detection signatures
• Source code
too harshly to Russia’s “surgical” espionage campaign.39 Russian threat actors have exploited
this policy ambiguity for years and could continue to do so for years to come. • CSP accounts Intelligence collection to support operational
• Software certificates planning
• Source code
2. The private sector is critical to the defense of US government networks.
Microsoft and FireEye were the public face of incident response during the SolarWinds
Examples of the types of information NOBELIUM operators may have acquired, based on the victim
attack. In the future, NOBELIUM and other groups could move early to handicap high- accounts they accessed, and the operational aims that likely drove the intrusion.
profile cybersecurity teams, anticipating that doing so will slow the time to identification and
remediation of intrusions against high-value targets.
39 Top Biden cyber official: SolarWinds breach could turn from spying to destruction 'in a moment' (yahoo.com) 40 https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2020/11/13/health-care-cyberattacks-covid-19-paris-peace-forum/ 41 https://tass.com/
politics/1289825 ; https://www.newsweek.com/russia-puts-us-top-unfriendly-countries-list-1586749 42 https://www.nsa.gov/News-Features/Feature-Stories/Article-View/Article/2573391/russian-foreign-intelligence-service-exploiting-five-publicly-
known-vulnerabili/ ; https://media.defense.gov/2021/Apr/15/2002621240/-1/-1/0/CSA_SVR_TARGETS_US_ALLIES_UOO13234021.PDF/CSA_SVR_TARGETS_US_ALLIES_UOO13234021.PDF ; https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0127 Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 59
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
China The following charts illustrate activity by China- HAFNIUM, a group assessed to be state sponsored they’ve gained access to a victim network,
based threat groups in July 2020–June 2021 and operating out of China, based on observed HAFNIUM typically exfiltrates data to file sharing
Over the past year, Microsoft observed Chinese
based on NSNs issued to customers. These charts victimology, tactics, and procedures, primarily sites like MEGA. In campaigns unrelated to these
nation state threat actors target the US political
represent only a portion of the threat actors’ targets entities in the United States across a number vulnerabilities, Microsoft has observed HAFNIUM
landscape for insight into policy shifts and target
activities observed. of industry sectors, including infectious disease interacting with victim Office 365 tenants. While they
government entities that enact foreign policies
researchers, law firms, higher education institutions, are often unsuccessful in compromising customer
in Europe and Latin American countries likely for
HAFNIUM and the Exchange vulnerabilities defense contractors, policy think tanks, and NGOs. accounts, this reconnaissance activity helps the
intelligence collection. To accomplish their mission,
In early March 2021, Microsoft blogged about HAFNIUM has previously compromised victims by adversary identify more details about their targets’
several China-based threat actors exploited a range
HAFNIUM for the first time related to the detection exploiting vulnerabilities in internet-facing servers environments. HAFNIUM operates primarily from
of previously unidentified vulnerabilities for different
of multiple 0-day exploits being used to attack on- and has used legitimate open-source frameworks, leased virtual private servers in the United States.
services and network components.
premises versions of Microsoft Exchange Server.43 like Covenant, for command and control. Once
Activity Other Country Industries China
Group Name names of origin targeted
MANGANESE APT5, Keyhole Panda China Communications infrastructure, defense industrial base, software/technology
ZIRCONIUM APT31 China Government agencies and services, diplomatic organizations, economic
organizations
HAFNIUM – – – China Higher education, defense industrial base, think tanks, NGOs, law firms,
medical research
NICKEL APT15, Vixen Panda China Government agencies and services, diplomatic organizations
CHROMIUM ControlX China Energy, communications infrastructure, education, government agencies and
services
GADOLINIUM APT40 China Maritime, healthcare, higher education, regional government organizations
43 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/03/02/hafnium-targeting-exchange-servers/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 60
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
China: Top five targeted industries/sectors China: Target attempts vs successful HAFNIUM: Top targeted industries/verticals
(July 2020-June 2021) compromise (July 2020-June 2021) (Prior to the increase in Exchange Server exploitation)
The most prevalent targets of China-based threat activity Chinese nation state threat actors were successful in
were government entities worldwide. The targeting of compromising victims 44% of the time. However, because they
three countries’ government entities accounted for half are an advance persistent threat, if they are tasked to target
of the NSNs issued and 23 countries accounted for the an entity for intelligence collection, they will find another
remaining half. vulnerability to leverage to gain access.
HAFNIUM used these vulnerabilities to access on- access. Second, they deployed web shells on the
CVE Description
premises Exchange servers, which enabled access to compromised server. Web shells potentially allow
email accounts and allowed installation of additional attackers to steal data and perform additional
CVE-2021-26855 Server-side request forgery (SSRF) vulnerability in Exchange, which allowed the
malware to facilitate long-term access to victim malicious actions that lead to further compromise. attacker to send arbitrary HTTP requests and authenticate as the Exchange server.
environments. MSTIC attributes this campaign with Third, they used that remote access, which was
CVE-2021-26857 An insecure deserialization vulnerability in the Unified Messaging service.
high confidence to HAFNIUM. The vulnerabilities typically run from the US-based private servers
exploited were CVE-2021-26855, CVE-2021-26857, to exfiltrate data from an organization’s network.
CVE-2021-26858 A post-authentication arbitrary file write vulnerability in Exchange.
CVE-2021-26858, and CVE-2021-27065. Microsoft assesses HAFNIUM was associated with
the initial activity with the 0-day exploits; however, CVE-2021-27065 A post-authentication arbitrary file write vulnerability in Exchange.
The attacks included three steps. First, HAFNIUM after the vulnerability announcement, several nation
would gain access to an Exchange Server either state actors and criminal groups maneuvered
with stolen passwords or by exploiting the quickly to take advantage of the vulnerabilities for
aforementioned vulnerabilities to gain initial their own gain.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 61
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
On July 19, 2021, the US government with its allies In April 2021, FireEye released a blog and credited A worldwide intelligence collection operation collection against Latin American countries and
and partners took a stance against the Chinese MSTIC for their contribution in identifying a Pulse After the September 2020 Microsoft blog on in Europe. Besides leveraging exploits for VPN
government and issued a statement that China’s Secure VPN 0-day exploit that was leveraged by multiple nation state threat actors targeting devices in their cyber operations, NICKEL’s activity
malicious cyber operation poses a major threat Chinese nation state threat actors.46 Microsoft information on US elections, ZIRCONIUM did also targeted government foreign ministries
to the United States and its allies’ economic and associates some of the activity with MANGANESE not stop their collection operations.48 As the US throughout Central and South American countries
national security.44 Although slim on the technical and NICKEL. The Department of Homeland Security presidential election day approached, ZIRCONIUM and some European countries. As China’s influence
details, the same statement attributed HAFNIUM Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency continued to employ web-bugged emails, targeting continues to shift in the region and with countries
with a high level of confidence to cyber actors (CISA) released an alert on the same 0-day activity individuals with access to knowledge of potential that are partners in their Belt and Road Initiative,
affiliated with China’s civilian intelligence agency, the indicating that it affected US government agencies, shifts in US policy. On July 19, 2021, the United we assess that Chinese threat actors will continue
Ministry of State Security. These actors compromised critical infrastructure entities, and other private Kingdom’s National Cyber Security Centre released to target entities to gain insight into investments,
tens of thousands of computers and networks sector organizations likely beginning in June 2020.47 a statement that attributed APT31, which is roughly negotiations, and influence.
worldwide in a massive cyber espionage campaign CISA stated that after the successful exploitation, tracked as ZIRCONIUM by Microsoft, to the Ministry
that mostly impacted private sector victims. the threat actor used their access to place web shells of State Security—China’s civilian intelligence
on the Pulse Connect Secure appliance for further agency.49
More 0-days and other exploitation of access and persistence.
vulnerabilities Chinese nation state cyber operations did not
In July, SolarWinds released a security advisory In addition to MANGANESE, MSTIC has observed overlook their neighbors. Since July 2020, activity
for CVE-2021-35211, crediting Microsoft with the ZIRCONIUM and two other threat actors who tied to CHROMIUM targeted entities in India,
notification.45 Microsoft detected the 0-day remote exploited small office or home office routers Malaysia, Mongolia, Pakistan, and Thailand and
code execution exploit being used to exploit the worldwide. These threat actors are likely the sensitive social, economic, and political
SolarWinds Serv-U FTP software at entities in the compromising routers to use as infrastructure issues surrounding Hong Kong and Taiwan. From
US Defense Industrial Base Sector and software for their computer network operations. These Microsoft’s perspective, CHROMIUM activity was
companies. This activity is attributed to a group compromised routers are likely in the same most active against universities in Hong Kong
operating out of China, based on observed geographical area as their intended target to and Taiwan, followed by government entities and
victimology, tactics, and procedures. obscure scrutiny against the associated activity. telecommunication providers in the other countries.
In addition to targeting neighboring countries,
there has been a steady drumbeat of intelligence
44 https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/07/19/the-united-states-joined-by-allies-and-partners-attributes-malicious-cyber-activity-and-irresponsible-state-behavior-to-the-peoples-republic-
of-china/ ; https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/uk-allies-hold-chinese-state-responsible-for-pervasive-pattern-of-hacking 45 SolarWinds Trust Center Security Advisories | CVE-2021-35211 46 https://www.fireeye.com/blog/threat-
research/2021/04/suspected-apt-actors-leverage-bypass-techniques-pulse-secure-zero-day.html 47 https://us-cert.cisa.gov/ncas/alerts/aa21-110a 48 https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2020/09/10/cyberattacks-us-
elections-trump-biden/ 49 https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/uk-allies-hold-chinese-state-responsible-for-pervasive-pattern-of-hacking Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 62
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Iran Focused on Israel with new attack tools amid Microsoft detected an increased focus from a A wait-and-see approach toward the United
broader escalation growing number of Iranian groups targeting Israeli States likely serves two purposes
Iran continued its streak of destructive cyberattacks
As a covert war between Iran and Israel escalated, entities since November, and with that focus came Despite Tehran’s less aggressive approach toward
against regional adversaries while taking a “wait-
Iranian offensive cyber actors increased their a string of ransomware attacks. An Iran-linked the United States, relative to its regional adversaries,
and-see” approach with the United States amid the
attention to Israel and brought with them Iran’s threat actor that we track as RUBIDIUM probably US entities remained Iranian threat actors’ top target,
prospects for sanctions relief from nuclear talks after
newest tool of choice—ransomware. Iran also conducted the Pay2Key and N3tw0rm ransomware comprising nearly half of the NSNs we delivered to
US elections.
conducted ransomware attacks against at least campaigns that almost exclusively targeted Israel in cloud-service customers. Iranian cyber operations
one Gulf State adversary.50 While it remains unclear late 2020 and early 2021, respectively. One common toward US targets consisted of a two-pronged
whether Iranian actors are using ransomware for element of RUBIDIUM’s ransomware campaigns was approach: acquiring strategic intelligence likely to
financial gain, in at least one case they used it as a its targeting of Israeli logistics companies involved in gain insights into US policy views and planning and
cover for a destructive attack by deploying wiper maritime transportation. These targets indicate a link acquiring a foothold on networks likely to provide
malware on a company’s network while demanding to Tehran’s broader objective of retaliating against Tehran with contingency options in case the United
a ransom.51 Israeli pressure.52 States failed to provide sufficient sanctions relief.
Activity Other Country Industries Iran
Group Name names of origin targeted
PHOSPHORUS Charming Kitten Iran Diplomatic and nuclear policy communities, academics, and journalists
CURIUM Houseblend Iran US military and defense contractors, IT services, and Middle Eastern
Tortoise Shell governments
RUBIDIUM Fox Kitten Iran Israeli logistics companies, IT services, and defense
Parasite
50 https://labs.sentinelone.com/from-wiper-to-ransomware-the-evolution-of-agrius ; https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/thanos-ransomware/ 51 https://labs.sentinelone.com/from-wiper-to-ransomware-the-evolution-of-agrius ; https://www.clearskysec.
com/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Pay2Kitten.pdf ; https://www.flashpoint-intel.com/blog/second-iranian-ransomware-operation-project-signal-emerges/ 52 https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/4/25/top-iranian-commander-hints-at-future-
response-to-isreal ; https://www.timesofisrael.com/eye-for-an-eye-iran-editorial-urges-retaliatory-attack-on-dimona-reactor/ ; https://www.al-monitor.com/originals/2021/04/iranian-military-leader-threatens-israel-following-missile-strike-syria Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 63
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
In late 2020, PHOSPHORUS began targeting nuclear Previously in 2020, PHOSPHORUS masqueraded as Iran: Most targeted countries (July 2020–June 2021)
policy experts in signatory nations of the 2015 conference organizers to high-profile international
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, very likely for conferences, as we detailed in this blog.54 At
intelligence to gain an edge in anticipated talks Microsoft, we detected PHOSPHORUS sending
on the accord following President Biden’s election. spoofed email invitations with links to credential
PHOSPHORUS conducted a credential phishing harvesting sites to more than 100 policy experts
campaign by masquerading as fellow foreign and who were prospective attendees, several of whom
nuclear policy experts and sending links to nuclear- they compromised. The group’s credential phishing
themed articles that directed victims to a credential campaign likely sought to acquire intelligence to
harvesting site. They targeted fewer than 25 senior better position itself in international engagement.
personnel at medical research organizations, as Since April 2021, select Iranian actors also targeted
detailed by Proofpoint,53 but the vast majority of the US agriculture and media companies that are
100-plus targets we detected were nuclear policy unlikely intelligence targets for Tehran.55 These
or conflict resolutions experts—in line with the same operators employed ransomware on other
theme of the phishing emails—in the United States, companies, suggesting a potential aim to gain a
United Kingdom, France, and Russia. PHOSPHORUS foothold for contingency plans in case nuclear talks
honed its targeting on this community as nuclear fail to meet Tehran’s expectations.
talks began in Vienna in April, including targeting
diplomat participants. In some cases, the Iranian targeting of US entities
that we have detected could be focused on
intelligence collection, contingency planning, or
both. Early this year, CURIUM conducted a spear-
phishing campaign targeting companies that provide
IT and engineering services for US defense and
intelligence agencies, probably as a part of a supply
chain operation to gain access to their customers.
53 https://www.proofpoint.com/us/blog/threat-insight/badblood-ta453-targets-us-and-israeli-medical-research-personnel-credential 54 https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2020/10/28/cyberattacks-phosphorus-t20-munich-
security-conference/ 55 DEV-0270 Compromise Agrinos on 30 May. https://spectre.microsoft.com/#/entry/19f1e6f3fe899dc1f315a9c432c597a3d4518115604afd63c169948ba7bc95cf?nonce=72c1a4aa8705; DEV-0270 compromised
Cox Media Group on 17 May. https://spectre.microsoft.com/#/entry/201936a4ffcde2e1eff5d21b43834c7e38631e47e1f66b9ab3bc1e1a135f074f?nonce=2b351540141b Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 64
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Flow of a typical PHOSPHORUS compromise from spear phish
Conferences,
conventions, and trade
shows are widely
known throughout
industry and the
US government
as a hotbed of
intelligence collection
activities, both by
domestic competitive
intelligence and foreign
adversaries. Individuals
have been known to
collect information
thrown out in the trash,
record presentations,
attempt to steal
products, and solicit
sensitive information
from employees.
Though these events
were widely paused
due to pandemic
restrictions, major
conventions are coming
back to calendars.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 65
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
North Korea Feeding a vast appetite for intelligence of those targeted were in three countries: South the international community continue to strictly
The vast majority of the North Korean targeting Korea, the United States, and Japan. However, North enforce sanctions on North Korea? How does
In the last year, North Korean threat actors have
Microsoft noted was directed at consumer account Korean actors also targeted academics and think COVID-19 change international dynamics? What will
been extremely active relative to the country’s
targets. For the most part, these targets were tank officials in Europe and even China and Russia, the new US administration’s policy be toward North
size and resources, compared to the other major
probably selected based on the likelihood they could countries generally seen as friendly to North Korea. Korea, and how will the tripartite US-South Korea-
attacking states. For example, in the last three
help North Korea obtain non-publicly available Japan partnership pursue that policy together?
months of 2020, just over half the NSNs Microsoft
diplomatic or geopolitical intelligence. North The focus on diplomatic or geopolitical intelligence
issued were for North Korean state actors, in spite
Korean groups THALLIUM and ZINC continued to likely was driven by Pyongyang’s anxiety for
of North Korea being the smallest of the four most
create much of the targeting Microsoft observed, information in a volatile international situation.
prolific nation state actors Microsoft tracks.
but they were joined by other groups, such as Diplomatic targeting was particularly heavy during
OSMIUM and CERIUM. Together, these groups and directly after the US election. North Korea’s
focused on diplomatic officials, academics, and strong interest in intelligence collection probably
think tank members from around the world. Most had several key questions it sought to answer: Will
Activity Other Country Industries North Korea
Group Name names of origin targeted
ZINC Lazarus North Korea Utilities, private companies, think tanks, security researchers
Labyrinth Chollima
THALLIUM Kimsuky North Korea Think tanks, diplomatic officials, academics
Velvet Chollima
CERIUM Kimsuky North Korea Think tanks, diplomatic officials, academics, defense and aerospace
OSMIUM Konni North Korea Diplomatic officials, think tanks
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 66
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Global pandemic creates a new type of The world’s only known nation state Bitcoin income. One such group Microsoft tracks, which we A sophisticated social engineering campaign
cyberattack thieves have not named, often targeted cryptocurrency or targeting security researchers
COVID-19 also drove another North Korean focus Alone among nation state actors, North Korea blockchain research companies with spear-phishing Finally, North Korea also used social engineering in
in the last year: the targeting of pharmaceutical continued in the last year to target financial campaigns while posing as cryptocurrency or ways not seen from it before. As MSTIC reported
companies. As Microsoft reported in November companies with the intent of stealing cryptocurrency blockchain start-ups. in concert with Google in January,57 ZINC targeted
2020,56 ZINC and CERIUM targeted pharmaceutical and intellectual property. North Korea’s economy, security researchers with a fairly sophisticated social
companies and vaccine researchers in several already under strain from sanctions, was put under engineering campaign. The campaign included
countries, probably to speed up its own vaccine even greater stress when it closed its borders to spending months setting up fake profiles that
research or to gain intelligence on the state of trade after the outbreak of COVID-19. Cyber-enabled looked like real security companies and researchers,
research in the rest of the world. theft presented one opportunity to make up lost with websites and social media platforms to support
these personas. This targeting sought long-term
effects beyond the immediate attack. It also
North Korea: Top 5 targeted industries North Korea: Failed attempts vs. successful showed that North Korea is more than capable of
and sectors (July 2020-June 2021) compromise (July 2020-June 2021) understanding the Western security landscape well
enough to blend into it.
Many of the consumer accounts were likely
Relentless spear-phishing attempts by groups
personal accounts of academics, think tank
such as THALLIUM do not often succeed,
members, and government officials.
but because they are so ubiquitous, even
occasional success yields big results.
56 https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2020/11/13/health-care-cyberattacks-covid-19-paris-peace-forum/ 57 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2021/01/28/zinc-attacks-against-security-researchers/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 67
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Vietnam As MSTIC reported in November 2020,58 BISMUTH carefully planned attacks, conducting reconnaissance before
creating uniquely crafted spear-phishing emails for each individual. Sometimes, BISMUTH actors, similar to
Vietnamese threat group BISMUTH utilized cryptocurrency miners to target private sector and government
PHOSPHORUS operators, would correspond with targets to build rapport before sending the email containing
institutions in France and Vietnam. Because cryptocurrency miners tend to be seen as lower-priority threats by
a malicious attachment. Once it compromised networks, BISMUTH sought to achieve continuous monitoring. Its
security systems, BISMUTH was able to take advantage of the smaller alert profile caused by their malware to slip
targets included human and civil rights organizations.
into systems unnoticed.
Activity Other Country Industries Vietnam
Group Name names of origin targeted
BISMUTH APT32 Vietnam Human rights and civil organizations
OceanLotus
Turkey
SILICON pursues intelligence collection for strategic Turkish interests from a variety of countries, primarily
in the Middle East and the Balkans. Their reconnaissance indicates the group is most heavily focused on
countries of strategic interest to Turkey including Armenia, Cyprus, Greece, Iraq, and Syria. They regularly target
telecommunication and IT companies, likely to establish a foothold upstream of their desired target, and often
seek access by scanning infrastructure for remote code vulnerabilities.
Activity Other Country Industries Turkey
Group Name names of origin targeted
SILICON Sea Turtle Turkey Telecommunications companies in the Middle East and the Balkans
UNC1326
58 https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2020/11/30/threat-actor-leverages-coin-miner-techniques-to-stay-under-the-radar-heres-how-to-spot-them/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 68
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Tracking nation state threats What we're seeing Analysis of nation state activity this year Private sector offensive actors Comprehensive protections required
Private sector based PSOA that Microsoft calls SOURGUM, and Comprehensive Therefore, defense-in-depth strategies against
that Citizen Lab identified as Candiru.60 SOURGUM nation state adversaries should include educating
offensive actors created malware and 0-day exploits (fixed in CVE- protections employees on how to avoid being targeted
2021-3197961 and CVE-2021-3377162) as a part of a themselves. Applying Zero Trust principles across
required
hacking-as-a-service package sold to government corporate resources helps more effectively adapt to
A growing industry of companies called private
agencies and other malicious actors. The malware the complexity of the modern environment, embrace
sector offensive actors (PSOAs) create and sell
was used to target more than 100 victims around the mobile workforce, and protect people, devices,
Nation state actors have demonstrated that they
malicious cyber technologies that enable their
the world including politicians, human rights applications, and data no matter where they are
will go to great lengths to accomplish a mission
customers to break into people’s computers, phones,
activists, journalists, academics, embassy workers, located or the scale of threats they face.
to collect information or intelligence. The skill and
and internet-connected devices. These private
and political dissidents. To limit these attacks,
persistence of malicious nation state actors increase
companies may not be nation state actors, but their
Microsoft has created and built protections into our While nation state attacks are often sophisticated
the difficulty of detecting and protecting against
business model presents a dangerous and rapidly
products against this unique malware, which we or can deploy 0-day vulnerabilities to gain access to
advanced threats. Their impact can be wide ranging
growing challenge for organizations, companies,
call DevilsTongue.63 By examining how SOURGUM’s networks, defense-in-depth strategies and proactive
and highly damaging. These adversaries are well-
and individual consumers. These tools also threaten
customers were delivering DevilsTongue to victim monitoring can greatly reduce the actor’s dwell
funded, employ techniques of tremendous breadth
many global human rights efforts, as they have been
computers, we saw they were doing so through a time on a network, potentially enabling disruption
and sophistication, and are motivated by objectives
observed targeting and surveilling dissidents, human
chain of exploits that impacted popular browsers of their activities before they reach their goals.
of national significance—which may lead to their
rights defenders, journalists, civil society advocates,
and our Windows operating system. We published Above and beyond enabling foundational basics
compromising networks for unexpected purposes.
and other private citizens.
details of the malware and 0-day exploits so that like MFA, IT departments should prioritize steps to
More than other adversaries, nation state attackers
the world can better understand SOURGUM’s mitigate lateral movement by attackers; specifically,
In December 2020, Microsoft’s efforts to protect target individuals specifically for access to their
activity and address and mitigate the threat. Private credential hygiene and network segmentation. To
our customers from the threats presented by this connections, communications, and information. At
companies should remain subject to liability when limit the damage of data exfiltration, information
technology led us to file an amicus brief in support the conclusion of an operation, they will assess what
they use their cyber-surveillance tools to break the rights management can be applied to files. Building
of WhatsApp’s case against Israel-based NSO went well and what did not and refine tactics and
law, or knowingly permit their use for such purposes, protective controls across your managed identities,
Group Technologies (NSO Group) along with Cisco, techniques for more successful future missions.
regardless of who their customers are or what devices, applications, data, infrastructure, and
GitHub, Google, LinkedIn, VMware, and Internet
they are trying to achieve. Microsoft will continue networks will raise the threshold for attackers,
Association.59 The brief encouraged the court to
to identify, track, and protect our customers and improving your organization’s ability to detect
reject NSO Group’s position that it is not responsible
global digital ecosystem from the indiscriminate anomalous activity in the environment.
for the use of its surveillance and espionage
attacks caused by PSOA technology and pursue
products by governments. Microsoft also worked
other methods to disrupt this growing threat to our
with Citizen Lab, at the University of Toronto’s Munk
customers.
School, to disable malware being used by an Israel-
59 Amicus Brief 12.20.2020 (microsoft.com) 60 Hooking Candiru: Another Mercenary Spyware Vendor Comes into Focus - The Citizen Lab 61 CVE-2021-31979 - Security Update Guide - Microsoft - Windows Kernel Elevation of Privilege
Vulnerability 62 CVE-2021-33771 - Security Update Guide - Microsoft - Windows Kernel Elevation of Privilege Vulnerability 63 Fighting cyberweapons built by private businesses - Microsoft On the Issues Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 69
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
CHAPTER 4
Supply chain, IoT, and OT security
Introduction
Challenges in managing risk associated with the supplier ecosystem
How Microsoft thinks about supply chain
IoT and OT threat landscape
The 7 properties of highly secured devices
Applying a Zero Trust approach to IoT solutions
IoT at the intersection of cybersecurity and sustainability
IoT security policy considerations
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
Innovation-driven opportunity in an
INTRODUCTION:
exponentially larger attack landscape
MICHAL BRAVERMAN-BLUMENSTYK, CORPORATE VICE PRESIDENT, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, CLOUD AND AI SECURITY
In the past year, we have observed an abundance of incidents driving both physical and digital disruption of THE ADOPTION
operations for many organizations. These incidents preyed at times on the physical realm, such as disruption of
OF IOT AND
production lines and energy substations, and in other cases, they were conducted entirely in the digital realm,
THE HUGE
such as via a ransomware campaign.
ACCELERATION
Looking at the attack surfaces that were exploited targets for exploitation, as witnessed recently in OT Security
IN REMOTE
provides an additional perspective: from legacy the highly visible and impactful SolarWinds and
OT devices, such as industrial control, hospital
operational technology (OT) equipment to brand Kaseya attacks. While threats and attacks continue to
monitoring, or water management systems, represent SERVICES, BOTH
new Internet of Things (IoT) devices; from seemingly intensify, supply chain complexity increases the costs
the public infrastructure that many societies have
ordinary cloud-migration projects to 5G IoT-related of defending and the likelihood that an exposure can
AT HOME AND IN
come to depend on for decades. Many are lagging
endeavors; and from physical supply chain to digital produce a significant return for an adversary.
in adopting and leveraging modern security
supply chain. All of these are playing an increasing role THE WORKPLACE,
standards. As evidenced by recent attacks on water,
as fertile attack surfaces. These are all topics we will IoT Security
transportation, and energy utilities, disruption in these
elaborate on in this chapter. INCREASES THE
IoT security is a geometrically expanding frontier with areas have profound and broad impact
innovation-driven opportunity and an exponentially LIKELIHOOD
Supply chain integrity
larger attack landscape. The adoption of IoT and the The chapter includes discussions about how
Supply chains, both physical and digital, have an huge acceleration in remote services, both at home organizations can understand and improve their IoT, OF RISK
explicit reliance on trust, and adversaries have taken and in the workplace since the onset of the COVID-19 OT, and supply chain security posture. We share in
MATERIALIZING.
notice. Over the last decade, successful organizations pandemic, increases the likelihood of risk materializing. these discussions our data-driven perspectives related
have been able to meet the demands of scale, This is a trend that will continue as technologies like to the IoT and OT threat landscape, research findings
efficiency, and speed by building expansive, and often 5G and innovative IoT applications become more by the Azure Defender for IoT team, global initiatives
complex, ecosystems to deliver value to stakeholders. ubiquitous. such as the Global Cyber Alliance, and more.
Security adversaries today view these systems as
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 7711
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
Challenges in managing risk
associated with the supplier What we’re hearing
ecosystem
Recently, the Microsoft M365 Security, Compliance, and Management team hosted an event to discuss
the challenges and strategic needs of CxOs (CISOs, CIOs, VPs/Heads of IT and Governance, and
As outsourcing for applications, infrastructure, devices, and human capital expands, the adoption of tools to others) and their organizations to gain a deeper understanding of their security and risk management
monitor multiple tiers of suppliers for quality, security, integrity, and resilience risks is also growing, and the experiences. T hese are some of the takeaways:
plethora of frameworks and approaches that organizations are leveraging today continues to grow in tandem.
Additional complexity emerges when frameworks are applied inconsistently within an organization and across 1. The selection and management of suppliers is shaped by a host of factors leading to lack of
suppliers, or if multiple frameworks are in play. clarity and low trust, as many struggle to know their environment.
Organizations must balance protecting themselves from human liability, issues inherent with hybrid
When it comes to risk assessment and management, siloes can create additional problems. Different teams work, shadow IT (unknown or unmanaged apps, services, and infrastructure developed and managed
have different priorities, which can lead to completely different risk appetites, priorities, practices, and cultures. outside standard policies), diversity of their digital estate, and evolving threats and vulnerabilities.
This inconsistency can be inefficient and create a duplication of effort, gaps in risk analysis, and an inability to Adding complexity, there are usually several parties weighing in on vendor/supplier selection. Security
effectively share risk information across the organization. is just one of the factors considered and often not a top priority, even though it is an area that needs
immediate attention. Organizations end up with long lists of suppliers that must be managed (some
An always-on, automated, integrated approach Siloed environments pose challenges to risk of them unknown), often with a limited look into their security practices and posture. Add to this that
is needed, but current processes aren’t well-suited assessment and management working within the confines of a supplier contract often limits the assessments. As a result, it is difficult
to evolve: to have desired visibility and trust in suppliers.
• Supplier assessment and review processes often
2. Proactive management of a supplier ecosystem is ideal, but difficult. Designated critical
include just a questionnaire.
suppliers require focus due to the potential risk they pose.
• Once a supplier is onboarded, there is only a
Organizations are often forced into a split approach to supplier management—proactive, when
point-in-time annual review cycle.
possible, but typically more reactive. Reactive approaches are a result of limited resources and projects
• Often, different teams within the same company scoped without security as a consideration. To ensure their protection is as comprehensive as possible,
have different processes and functions and no organizations keep critical suppliers (those critical to an organization’s mission) on a shorter leash, with
clear way to share information across teams. less flexibility and more oversight.
This can make it difficult to create a holistic and
automated view of organizational risk.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 72
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
How Microsoft Nine secure supply chain focus
areas
3. Leaders are devoting more resources to supplier security, but recent breaches demonstrated thinks about
that traditional models couldn’t guarantee safety. Outlined below is a framework to efficiently evaluate
IT teams are appreciative of the influx of budget and resources following the SolarWinds and Colonial supply chain your supply chain ecosystem with considerations
Pipeline breaches. That appreciation comes with an equal amount of trepidation. Those breaches for how you might approach protecting it. We
demonstrated that the very strategies they are implementing likely would not protect them from a group our investments into nine secure supply chain
The end-to-end supply chain and supplier
similar attack, and continuous assessments and push for remediation across tiers of suppliers are workstreams to methodically evaluate and mitigate
ecosystem is complex and opaque, extending
necessary. risk of exposure in each area.
from development to build, chips to firmware,
drivers, operating system, third-party applications,
4. Greater visibility and unique solutions are top requests to managing suppliers. 1. First-party engineering systems for hardware
manufacturing/factory, and all the way to secure
Within the four key pillars of digital estates—identities, applications, infrastructure, and devices— and software
updates. Governments and critical infrastructure
suppliers’ personnel are a top concern. Across that risk hierarchy, organizations are looking for Massive software development companies aren’t
providers are looking for a new level of assurance for
suppliers to provide: the only ones doing engineering work. Even small
supply chain security and continuity. It’s important
IT shops that may make minimal development
• Greater visibility into security and who ultimately has access to the organization’s data.
that a repeatable process will continue to scale as
investments and organizations building on top of
• Customized solutions demonstrating a working knowledge of the industry and the company- organizations continue to innovate. Supply chain
existing infrastructure have teams writing code.
specific needs. security rigor is foundational to how an organization
should work and is expected by partners and
customers who interact with an organization’s
products and services.
Zero Trust security model for supplier ecosystem risk Nine areas of investment for a secure end-to-end supply chain
For supplier risk management, having customized solutions and greater visibility into who ultimately has access
to an organization’s data across domains are top priorities. While there are many places to begin your Zero
Trust journey, from a supplier ecosystem and risk management standpoint, instituting multifactor authentication
(MFA) should be a priority.
For more information on Zero Trust strategy, see the Hybrid workforce security chapter of this report.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 73
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
To produce secure software or hardware, Build: Without appropriate protections, the 3. Physical security LEVERAGING MACHINE LEARNING IN
organizations must ensure that the first-party build pipeline presents product compromise Organizations must define, implement, and manage CONTINUOUS SECURITY MONITORING
engineering system is secured from the various risks that can be highly effective and difficult appropriate security controls to ensure the security OF SUPPLIERS
threat vectors that could be exploited by attackers. to trace. While source control will usually have Microsoft leverages machine learning (ML) to scan
some form of change management, without 4. Manufacturing security active supplier contracts. This model is trained to
Developer environment: The developer appropriate controls in place in a build system, Manufacturing standards must be defined and recognize commonly negotiated security clauses
environment encompasses the tools and it can be difficult to identify what might have enforced to enable detection, protection, and and determine whether or not they meet the intent
platforms that developers author code on, such been injected during the build process. recovery from cyberattacks. Organizations must of the original requirement. The outputs of this
as operating systems, code editors, research also ensure that samples or prototypes are continuous scanning are leveraged to advise the
tools (for example, browsers and associated Release: Ensuring you are releasing what you securely handled and stored, and that appropriate third parties operating within our environments and
websites), local build tools, and other general intended is the end goal of a secure software monitoring is in place to track and maintain the ensure their expectations and accountabilities are
code authoring tools. The primary target is supply chain. Enumerating inputs and verifying chain of custody for all proprietary items or clearly defined.
developer identity, and solutions must be put the final product takes a comprehensive finished goods.
Continuous security monitoring using ML
in place to mitigate this risk. understanding of complex systems and is an
essential final step in ensuring an organization 5. Logistics security
Source code: The risk of malicious code can knows what it is releasing. Logistics functions must be safeguarded to prevent
arise when developers take source code and tampering, loss, or theft of the products during
binaries from a variety of sources, including 2. Firmware and driver security transportation and storage. Hardware and devices
from internal sources, open-source software Firmware and drivers are the foundation of most teams should have appropriate operational controls
(OSS), or from another organization. Each hardware devices. If hacked and embedded with and frameworks in place with the suppliers to ensure
source needs to have a level of trust ensured malware, they pose a huge risk to the hardware receiving, shipping, storage, and other logistics
and known to have appropriately secure device and the organization that depends on it, management nodes are secure and compliant with
supply chain checks. In most reported OSS- potentially creating unauthorized access, making it the company’s standards.
as-malware cases, the malware is designed inoperable or even unbootable. Organizations need
to steal developer credentials and build to ensure that all firmware and drivers installed on 6. Supplier security
environment variables, exfiltrating them to a servers or end-user equipment follow the required When engaging with suppliers, organizations must
remote attacker-controlled server. security requirements and have the necessary ensure that the suppliers comply with well-defined
documentation to prove their compliance. supplier security and privacy assurance requirements
throughout the duration of their partnership. Learn more:
Transforming how Microsoft connects with its 58,000
suppliers – Inside Track Blog
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 74
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
7. Security validations and assurances 9. Monitoring and detections US Executive Order and software with privileged access or other attributes
The active nature of the adversaries requires Each of the supply chain focus areas above require that make it especially critical, the EO calls for
supply chain security
continuous evaluation of the security posture of the monitoring, detection, and follow-up actions when security measures, published by the National
Issued on May 12, 2021, the Executive Order
end-to-end supply chain to identify and prioritize questionable activity is identified. Increasingly Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in
(EO) on Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity
security investments. A mix of internal audits, monitoring, detection, and initial response are July, to manage operational risk. Microsoft has
(EO 14028) outlines significant new steps for US
lessons learned from recent events, and penetration automated in today’s hyper-scaled cloud operations. long invested in developing best practices for
federal agencies and their technology providers
testing provides assurance that the right controls These actions cover common cases but can also be secure software development, software testing,
to strengthen IT modernization, improve incident
are in place to detect, prevent, and/or mitigate adaptable to deal with new or unimagined scenarios. and vulnerability disclosure and management
response, and enhance software supply chain
these attacks. The findings from these engagements programs, and we’ve contributed to efforts to define
security.66 Section 4 focuses on software supply
help identify the next set of requirements to Learn more: industrywide practices and consensus standards,
be addressed. chain security, enumerating areas of requirements including through SAFECode,68 ISO,69 and NIST.70
Firmware security - Azure Security | Microsoft Docs
to be developed for both software providers and
Along with GitHub, Microsoft has also contributed to
(6/24/2021)
federal agency users of software. For software
8. Trust chain governance and resilience efforts to develop best practices and specifications
Microsoft Open Source Software Security
providers, the EO calls for requirements to enhance
Customers trust their supplier organizations protect to define use cases for and support the delivery of
Datacenter security overview - Microsoft Service ability to resist tampering or attack and foster
them as they use their products and services. First- SBOMs, which identify what software is composed
Assurance | Microsoft Docs (8/23/2021) greater transparency into components, including
party trust chains provide identity, integrity, and of and allow software providers to associate
non-repudiation for the organization’s platform, Physical security of Azure datacenters - Microsoft through secure software development practices and information with components. Microsoft and
products, and services. The main elements of trust Azure | Microsoft Docs (7/10/2020) environments, use of tools or processes for software GitHub support delivering SBOMs to enable
verification and vulnerability checks, providing
chains are public key infrastructure, cryptographic Supply Chain Security - Microsoft Research vulnerability and integrity checks, and we’re
of Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) information,
algorithms, hardware, and the supporting teams and committed to leveraging SBOMs as part of a
Microsoft Security Development Lifecycle
participation in a vulnerability disclosure program,
facilities. Effective governance of third-party trust broader evidence store that would verify end-to-
and other practices. For federal agency users of
chains is critical. end supply chain integrity.
Learn more:
Microsoft and NIST collaborate on EO to drive Zero Trust adoption | Microsoft Security Blog (8/17/2021)
Know your suppliers and understand
CYBER EO | Microsoft Federal
their supply chains.
Microsoft - Executive Order - NIST workshop position paper 4- Testing software source code Microsoft Corporation.pdf
Microsoft - Executive Order - NIST workshop position paper 5- Software integrity chains Microsoft Corporation.pdf
Microsoft’s approach to coordinated vulnerability disclosure
NTIA_RFC_SBOM_Minimum_Elements_MSFT_Response_061721.docx.pdf
66 Executive Order on Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity | The White House 67 Security Measures for EO-Critical Software Use | NIST
68 Fundamental Practices for Secure Software Development, Third Edition - SAFECode 69 ISO - ISO/IEC 27034-1:2011 - Information technology —
Security techniques — Application security — Part 1: Overview and concepts 70 Secure Software Development Framework | CSRC (nist.gov) Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 75
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
IoT and OT plant71 led to a hazardous situation, in which Evolving cyberthreats
cyber actors obtained unauthorized access and
Enterprises are having to contend with evolving
threat used the SCADA system’s software to increase the
cyberthreats and novel malware. These issues
concentration of sodium hydroxide—a caustic
landscape include supply-chain attacks such as HAVEX73 and
chemical—in the water. The hack of a security
SolarWinds,74 0-day industrial control systems (ICS)
camera provider72 exposed sensitive footage from
malware such as Triton75 and Industroyer,76 fileless
hospitals, police departments, and a plethora of
Successful solutions today often depend on the malware,77 and living-off-the-land tactics using
other companies.
convergence of many components, including standard administrator tools,78 which are harder to
hardware, software, and cloud services, which often spot because they blend in with legitimate day-to-
All these developments underscore the need for
come together in an IoT solution. IoT is more than day activities. These attacks have also increased in
organizations to secure their IoT and OT footprints.
connected devices—it’s about the information frequency and severity in the past year.
Organizations are interconnected more than ever,
those devices collect and the powerful, immediate
resulting in increased exposure of legacy OT devices
insights that can be garnered from that information. From a technical perspective, the Triton attack on
and environments, including those that have existed
Accordingly, IoT and other embedded and OTs have the safety controllers in a Middle East petrochemical
in relative isolation. On the other hand, the newest
become critical business, operational, and security facility was intended to cause major structural
IoT devices (such as smart TVs and smart sensors)
topics. More than ever, IoT and OT security is finding damage to the facility and possible loss of life. The
reside in both OT and IT environments. Putting all
its way into corporate boardrooms and state and attackers got their initial foothold in the IT network
of this together, with the added context of privacy
federal legislature discussions as a high-priority and subsequently used living-off-the-land tactics to
concerns and regulatory compliance, stresses the
issue, in part due to the increasing frequency and gain remote access to the OT network, where they
need for a holistic approach that enables seamless
severity of attacks in the past year. This proliferation deployed their OT purpose-built malware.
security and governance across all OT and IoT
of attacks has also driven increased awareness
devices.
of the extent to which cyberattacks in the digital
realm can impact the physical realm: the Colonial
Learn more:
Pipeline cyberattack directly led to shutdown of the
largest conduit for gasoline in the United States. The SCADA Hacking: The Most Important SCADA/ICS
compromise of the Oldsmar water Attacks in History (hackers-arise.com) (4/12/2021)
71 Lessons Learned from Oldsmar Water Plant Hack – Security Today72 Hackers breach Verkada’s giant trove of security-camera data collection | Fortune 73 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Havex
74 https://msrc-blog.microsoft.com/2020/12/13/customer-guidance-on-recent-nation-state-cyber-attacks/ 75 https://www.fireeye.com/blog/threat-research/2017/12/attackers-deploy-new-ics-attack-framework-triton.html
76 https://www.zdnet.com/article/industroyer-an-in-depth-look-at-the-culprit-behind-ukraines-power-grid-blackout/ 77 https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/threat-protection/intelligence/fileless-threats
78 PowerShell, Windows Management Instrumentation MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 7766
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
How an attacker can get into an enterprise through IoT
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 77
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
What we’re seeing: IoT-related malware in the wild
Distribution of IoT command and control services by country (July 2020–June 2021) Distribution of IoT malware CPU architecture (July 2020–June 2011)
Top IoT malware detected in the wild (July 2020-June 2021)
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 78
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
Findings: Industrywide IoT and memalign, valloc, pvalloc, and others. Our research The following is an example of BadAlloc:
showed that memory allocation implementations
OT vulnerabilities
written throughout the years as part of IoT devices
The Microsoft Defender for IoT team conducts
and embedded software have not incorporated
research on various types of equipment ranging
proper input validations. Without these input
from legacy industrial control system controllers
validations, an attacker could exploit the memory
to cutting-edge IoT sensors. Upon discovery of a
allocation function to perform a heap overflow,
vulnerability, the findings are shared with relevant
resulting in execution of malicious code on a
vendors through a responsible disclosure process
target device.
led by the Microsoft Security Response Center and
the US Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
The memory allocation vulnerabilities can be
enabling these vendors to investigate and patch
invoked by calling the memory allocation function,
the vulnerability.
such as malloc(VALUE), with the VALUE parameter
derived dynamically from external input and being
In April 2021, we uncovered a series of critical
large enough to trigger an integer overflow or
memory allocation vulnerabilities in IoT and OT
wraparound. The concept is as follows: When
devices that adversaries could exploit to bypass
sending this value, the returned outcome is a
security controls to execute malicious code or cause
freshly allocated memory buffer. While the size
a system crash. The group of vulnerabilities was
of the allocated memory remains small due to
dubbed BadAlloc. These remote code execution
the wraparound, the payload associated with the
vulnerabilities affected a wide range of industries
memory allocation exceeds the actual allocated
and verticals, from consumer and medical IoT, to
buffer, resulting in a heap overflow. This heap
industrial IoT, OT, and industrial control systems.
overflow enables an attacker to execute malicious
They covered more than 25 common vulnerabilities
code on the target device.
and exposures (CVEs). In the context of IT
environments, an exploitation of such a vulnerability BadAlloc is a case that illustrates the extensive The protection of IoT and OT devices from to ensure that modern digital environments are
can result in a loss of confidentiality. In the context impact these vulnerabilities can have because the exposure to IT risks becomes more important as not held back by threats from legacy technology
of OT environments, it can be used to trigger a risk exists in IoT and OT devices across all major they converge. Too often these risks are addressed connected to OT systems. Mitigation requires an
disruption of operations. industries. This example highlights one of the in isolation with a rigidly siloed approach. To be integrated approach that spans the entire enterprise.
biggest challenges in mitigating IT, IoT, and OT risks: successful in countering attacks, risks should be Organizations should look for opportunities to
The vulnerabilities stem from using vulnerable they share attack surfaces, and attackers look at the dealt with holistically while also accommodating harden, patch, or segment systems to reduce the
memory functions, such as malloc, calloc, realloc, entire ecosystem. domain expertise in each area. It is also critical attack surface.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 79
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
BadAlloc impact matrix Mitigating IoT and OT vulnerabilities such Segment. Network segmentation is important for
as BadAlloc Zero Trust because it limits the attacker’s ability
to move laterally and compromise assets after
We recommend the following mitigation strategies
initial intrusion. IoT devices and OT networks
for organizations with IoT and OT devices:
should be isolated from corporate IT networks
Patch, patch, patch. Follow vendor instructions for by using firewalls.
applying patches to affected products.
Learn more:
If you can’t patch, monitor. Since most legacy
Eliminating IoT vulnerabilities using CIS Benchmarks
IoT and OT devices don’t support agents, use an
and Azure Defender for IoT – Microsoft Tech
IoT/OT-aware network detection and response
Community (8/8/2021)
(NDR) solution79 and a SIEM/SOAR solution80 to
auto-discover and continuously monitor devices
for anomalous or unauthorized behaviors, such
as communication with unfamiliar local or remote
hosts. These elements are essential in implementing
BadAlloc is an example of an IoT/OT family of vulnerabilities that poses a risk across all industries. The a Zero Trust strategy for IoT/OT.
extent and nature of the risk depends on the specific context of usage of the device. BadAlloc shouldn’t
Reduce the attack surface. Eliminate unnecessary
be treated as only an OT or IT issue; instead, organizations should take a holistic approach to mitigating
the risk. internet connections to OT control systems and
implement virtual private network (VPN) access
with MFA when remote access is required. The
US DHS warns that VPN devices may also have
vulnerabilities and should be updated to the most
current version available.
79 https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/azure-defender-for-iot/ 80 https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/azure-sentinel/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 80
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
The 7 properties
Device identity and integrity are protected by hardware. Physical countermeasures resist side-channel attacks.
Hardware root
of highly of trust Does the device have a unique, unforgeable identity that is inseparable from the hardware? Is the integrity of the
device software secured by hardware?
secured devices
Multiple mitigations applied against threats. Countermeasures mitigate the consequences of a successful attack on any
Defense in depth one vector.
We suggest ensuring the hardware and operating Does the device remain secured even if one security mechanism is breached?
system of both your and your suppliers’ devices
Private keys stored in a hardware-protected vault, inaccessible to software. Division of software into self-protecting layers.
are designed and implemented securely, have Small trusted
high barriers to compromise, and incorporate computing base Is the device’s security enforcement code protected from bugs in other software on the device?
mechanisms and processes that continually monitor,
alert, and restore security when necessary.
Hardware-enforced barriers between software components prevent a breach in one from propagating to others.
Dynamic
Through extensive research and testing, Microsoft compartments Is a failure in one component of the device contained to that component? Can new compartments be added in
field to address new security threats?
identified the seven properties that are present in all
standalone, internet-connected devices considered
Signed token, signed by an unforgeable cryptographic key, proves the device identity and authenticity.
Password-less
to be highly secured. In many cases, these highly
authentication Does the device authenticate itself with certificates or other tokens signed by the hardware root of trust?
secured devices apply additional security measures,
but in all cases each of the seven properties is
present. Collectively, these seven properties provide A software error, such as a buffer overrun induced by an attacker probing security, is reported to cloud-based failure
analysis system.
a baseline foundation of security throughout
Error reporting
device silicon, software architecture and OS, cloud Does the device report errors for analysis to enable verification of the correctness of in-field device execution
and identification of new threats?
communications, and cloud services. The complexity
of maintaining all seven properties could be a barrier
Update brings the device forward to a secure state and revokes compromised assets for known vulnerabilities or security
for some organizations, despite the exceptional
Renewable breaches.
cost that often results from a fallout of incomplete
security
Is the device’s software updated automatically? Can the device’s security TCB software be updated rapidly
device security.
without repackaging other device code?
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 81
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
Applying a Zero After basic security requirements are met, you Continual updates to keep devices healthy
can shift your focus to the specific Zero Trust Utilize a centralized configuration and compliance
Trust approach requirements for IoT solutions: management solution and a robust update
mechanism to ensure devices are up to date and in
to IoT solutions
a healthy state.
Strong identity to authenticate devices
Register devices, issue renewable credentials,
Security monitoring and response to detect and
Securing IoT solutions with a Zero Trust security employ passwordless authentication, and use a
respond to emerging threats
model81 starts with non-IoT specific requirements— hardware root of trust to ensure you can trust its
Employ proactive monitoring to rapidly identify
specifically ensuring you have implemented the identity before making decisions.
unauthorized or compromised devices.
basics to securing identities and their devices and
limiting their access. These requirements include Least privilege access to mitigate blast radius
Learn more:
explicitly verifying users, having visibility into the Implement device and workload access control to
devices they’re bringing on to the network, and limit any potential blast radius from authenticated Azure Defender for IoT | Microsoft Azure
being able to make dynamic access decisions by identities that may have been compromised or
Azure Sentinel – Cloud-native SIEM Solution |
using real-time risk detections. Meeting these running unapproved workloads. Microsoft Azure
requirements helps to limit the potential blast radius
https://aka.ms/7properties
of users gaining unauthorized access to IoT services Device health to gate access or flag devices
Nineteen cybersecurity best practices used to
and data in the cloud or on-premises. Otherwise, for remediation
implement the seven properties of highly secured
you could face both mass information disclosure Check security configuration, assess for
devices in Azure Sphere (microsoft.com) (July 2020)
(such as leaked production data of a factory) and vulnerabilities and insecure passwords, and monitor
Zero Trust Cybersecurity for the Internet of Things
potential elevation of privilege for command and for active threats and anomalous behavioral alerts
(4/30/2021)
control of cyber-physical systems (such as stopping to build ongoing risk profiles.
a factory production line).
81 Zero Trust Security Model and Framework | Microsoft Security Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 82
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
IOT at the sustainability will become a primary driver for that can then provide a pathway for attackers to Moreover, it is critical to understand the security
operational deployment of IoT. To make significant reach OT systems, and the reverse is also possible. posture of supply systems that are not on the
intersection of improvements to their environmental footprint, In one example, attackers used an aquarium organization’s IT/OT network, but nonetheless affect
organizations must assess and monitor their system to access a casino’s high-roller databases,84 operations. Just as an organization looks to improve
cybersecurity
behavior and then use automated or remote- demonstrating that any device with connectivity can efficiency and sustainability, its suppliers do too.
control methods to optimize it. present a motivated attacker with an opening. These supply systems may be connected outside
and
of the network (such as cellular) to measure and
The challenge is figuring out how to measure, While many organizations are evolving their IT monitor the device operation, reduce truck rolls,
sustainability
monitor, and automate these systems securely. security approach (moving away from a perimeter- and deliver more uptime. Compromises in externally
These systems might contain sensitive data, connect based security model to a Zero Trust model), IoT managed infrastructure components can directly
Organizations generally deploy IoT to improve the to business systems across your organization, is often overlooked and lagging. For example, impact downstream businesses. For example, turning
bottom line: better quality, higher productivity/ and increasingly impact the physical operation of organizations know to encrypt sensitive data from off the chillers in a building could halt operations
less downtime, production optimization, and your enterprise. Attacks like the aforementioned applications, but many have not considered that and spoil inventory, air quality sensors may not alert
reducing operating costs and/or increasing output Triton82 or Crash Override83 that specifically target their control systems rely on the Modbus protocol, workers to unsafe conditions, and so on.
nonlinearly. Improving the business in these ways OT systems demonstrate that these systems which by design lacks any authentication and sends
also reduces waste: less resource use for the same are attractive targets for nation states and data in the open. While PCs are routinely required While IoT can and will enable better environmental
or greater output, higher uptime, reduction in scrap, cybercriminals, and they have the potential to both to have updated certificates, IoT devices are often practices, it is essential that all connected systems—
and so on. While IoT investment specifically for disrupt business operations and potentially create deployed with factory default passwords. which may be in place for a decade or longer—are
sustainability is less common, sustainability as an environmental damage. designed, evaluated, and operated securely. As the
initiative is no longer regarded as a zero-sum effort Compromises in these OT systems may disrupt world adapts to the new priorities that emerged
in conflict with business value. It is essential to assess the security of OT systems operations, but attackers are also focusing on how during the pandemic, companies are looking to
with the same rigor and comprehensiveness as IoT and OT interact. Industrial control systems are address the growing sustainability challenges ahead.
As organizations face increasing pressure to improve IT systems. As we have observed, attackers will often updated or retrofitted with remote capabilities, Secured IoT will play a critical role in enabling
their environmental footprint—from shareholder choose the “soft targets” as a point of ingress. Spear introducing new attack vectors that allow virtual businesses to both sustainably use and protect vital
calls and new government regulations— phishing or similar attacks allow access to IT systems attacks to cause harm in physical scenarios. Earlier resources and utilities today and into the future.
this year, a water treatment plant in Florida fell
victim to an attacker that remotely accessed critical
systems and attempted to alter the amount of
It is essential to assess the security of OT systems with
chemicals in the water supply.85
the same rigor and comprehensiveness as IT systems.
82 Hackers use Triton malware to shut down plant, industrial systems | ZDNet 83 Crash Override Malware Took Down Ukraine’s Power Grid Last December | WIRED 84 A smart fish tank left a casino vulnerable to hackers (cnn.com)
85 FBI, Secret Service investigating cyberattack on Florida water treatment plant - TechRepublic Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 83
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
IoT adoption for sustainability cybersecurity health. These standards are intended agency use of IoT devices, and EO 14028, which
to provide guidance for manufacturers, developers, proposes a consumer IoT device labeling program
and users to identify and adopt best practices for that may also reference NISTIR 8259A as well as
device security. Prominent examples of international compatibility with ETSI or ISO standards. Other
Those adopting standards include the European Telecommunications examples include the proposed mandatory security
IoT for Standards Institute (ETSI) standard for consumer requirements for consumer smart devices in the
sustainability IoT security released in June 2020, ETSI EN 303 645. UK,88 and the voluntary device labeling schemes
are more likely
The ETSI standard is now a public set of resources in Singapore and Finland, all based on ETSI EN
to be in the
that governments and companies around the world 303 645. In leveraging international standards and
implementation
can use to enhance the security of IoT devices, widely used best practices, policymakers can also
phase of their
AI strategy than and it includes both governance and technical help to ensure that mandatory requirements are
those adopting recommendations. It was created through a consistent and mutually recognized across regions
IoT for other rigorous and collaborative multistakeholder process to avoid fragmentation that would work against IoT
reasons.86
involving experts from industry, government, innovation, interoperability, and security.
and academia. Similarly, after an iterative public
consultation process, in May 2020, NIST released Global Cyber Alliance project:
IoT security and appropriately tailored cybersecurity policy a
complex task. To tackle the IoT threat landscape, NISTIR 8259A, which details a baseline set of device How policy and standards
capabilities necessary for common cybersecurity
policy the global community of IoT manufacturers and improve IoT security
controls. The International Organization for
cybersecurity experts has developed sets of
considerations Standardization (ISO) and the International Standards, laws, and proposed requirements for
best practice standards for IoT device cybersecurity.
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) are also minimum IoT device security baselines share many
These standards have demonstrated effectiveness
developing a minimum-security baseline. commonly recommended or required controls.
against common attacks, and industry and
Policymakers around the world are acknowledging The first three provisions of the ETSI standard for
policymakers alike can leverage them for
the profound implications of IoT security for privacy, Policy can help manufacturers adopt international consumer IoT security, ETSI EN 303 645, are the most
immediate improvements to the global state of
safety, critical infrastructure protection, and digital standards in a consistent way to improve security highly recommended by ETSI and make appearances
IoT device security for consumer, enterprise, and
transformation in general. Approaches to IoT across a range of consumer products and in several national-level policies. These include:
government users.
security policy range from voluntary programs to promote an advanced state of security in critical 1. No default passwords
mandatory security requirements. The range of IoT applications. In the United States, policy initiatives 2. Implement a vulnerability disclosure policy
Minimum security baselines
device types, growing number of devices, and the based on standards include the IoT Cybersecurity 3. Keep software updated
volume of interactions between devices, the physical Standards for minimum IoT security baselines Improvement Act of 2020,87 which references NISTIR
world, and the internet make developing effective provide a promising start to improving global 8259A for managing risks associated with US federal
86 Microsoft IOT Signals report, to be published November 2021 87 Text of H.R. 1668 (116th): IoT Cybersecurity Improvement Act of 2020 (Passed Congress
version) - GovTrack.us 88 New cyber security laws to protect smart devices amid pandemic sales surge – GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 84
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
State laws in California and Oregon both prohibit used to help policymakers and industry leaders emulated IoT devices distributed worldwide to SUMMARY OF GCA CONCLUSIONS
default passwords for IoT devices. Similarly, understand the benefit of best practice approaches provide real, at-scale, long-term attack data to GCA’s analysis of real attack data shows that default
recommendations or requirements for updated to IoT device security, and as proof points for understand trends and changes in IoT attack passwords factory-set by device manufacturers and
software and use of secure communications manufacturers to adopt standards and comply methodologies. never changed by users, along with weak passwords
protocols like HTTPS also frequently appear in with policy. set by users, together represent the most exploited
standards and policies around the globe. The research tested three controls commonly security vulnerability for IoT devices. Policy and
Using home-grown honeypot technology, GCA referenced in IoT security standards and policy: regulatory frameworks can help drive adoption and
Microsoft supported a research study conducted by created an enticingly accessible target for would-be harmonize implementation of the requirements in
• Secured access control (“no default passwords”)
the Global Cyber Alliance (GCA)89 to demonstrate attackers to learn as much as possible about the IoT device security standards such as NISTIR 8259,
• Device capability to update software and
the effectiveness of commonly recommended existence, source, and prevalence of attacks. GCA ETSI EN 303 645, and ISO/IEC 27402 to promote
recommendation to keep software updated
controls in preventing attacks. The analysis can be operated a large honey farm of several hundred secured access control best practices and address
• Data in transit is protected this risk.
GCA honeyfarm attacker traffic by protocol GCA honeyfarm attacks with activity (commands and downloads) by protocol
Roughly equal attacker traffic scanning for open ports through which to launch attacks. Telnet is the clear protocol of choice for exploitation in attacks launched on IoT devices.
89 https://www.globalcyberalliance.org/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 85
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
The research also showed widespread prevalence Microsoft data and threat When we look at attacks against these two ports, we see things are anything but static. Different actors come
of attempts to exploit security vulnerabilities in and go, in many cases repurposing bots with leaked source code such as MIRAI. Often these attacks replicate
signals support these findings
the software stacks of IoT devices. This finding existing ways of working, but we have started to see more advanced use cases where bots are leveraging new
The GCA project findings align well to what Microsoft
offers support for the effectiveness of keeping exploits.90 It is worth noting that many of these attacks continue to use poor passwords as a basis for lateral
sees across its IoT sensor network. Generic HTTP
software updated and using secure communications movement between infected hosts.
scanning and scraping forms the bulk of requests we
protocols to prevent attempts to compromise
receive, followed by Secure Shell (SSH) and Telnet,
security vulnerabilities. Microsoft’s sensor network gives us raw data on these types of attacks and the passwords in use. We looked at
respectively. Both protocols are frequently seen
over 280,000 attacks and analyzed the password data we collected. Perhaps unsurprisingly we saw that 96% of
across IoT/OT devices, with Telnet in particular being
The prevalence of attack attempts observed on attacks used a password with fewer than 10 characters, 92% had fewer than 8, and slightly more shockingly, 72%
a favorite of botnets like MIRAI and others based on
security vulnerabilities in IoT device software also of all attacks required only trying a password of 6 characters or less. Within these password attempts, only 2%
it. The two protocols are also commonly associated
supports the notion that commonly recommended included a special character and 72% didn’t even contain a number.
with brute force password attacks, and when taken
nontechnical controls would reduce the likelihood
of attack success. In particular, requirements for together become the most prevalent type of attack The attacks we are seeing in the wild line up with the GCA data and other reports. Default passwords, which are
manufacturers to implement a vulnerability disclosure we see against IoT/OT devices. generally a single short English word, make it trivial for an attacker to access an organization’s infrastructure. If
and management policy and to disclose the security secure identity management with an organization’s IoT devices is not an option, longer passwords—especially
Distribution of attacks against popular IoT/OT
support status of their products would provide those with special characters—are strongly advised.
protocols (July 2020-June 2021)
valuable information to consumers.
Attacks against Telnet and SSH ports
Learn more:
Global Cyber Alliance: IoT Policy and Attack Report
90 How to proactively defend against Mozi IoT botnet | Microsoft Security Blog Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 86
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Managing supplier ecosystem risk How Microsoft thinks about supply chain IoT and OT threat landscape 7 properties of secured devices Applying Zero Trust to IoT IoT and sustainability IoT policy
Passwords seen in 45 days of sensor signals
>20 Million
NUMBER OF TIMES
WE OBSERVED
THE PASSWORD
“ADMIN” USED IN
IOT DEVICES OVER
A 45 DAY PERIOD.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 8877
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
CHAPTER 5
Hybrid workforce security
Introduction
A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work
Identities
Devices/Endpoints
Applications
Network
Infrastructure
Data
People
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 88
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
The basics matter
INTRODUCTION:
BRET ARSENAULT, CHIEF INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER
ORGANIZATIONS
This past year continued to challenge us in profound ways. While most industries made the shift to remote
work due to the pandemic, it created new attack surfaces for cybercriminals to take advantage of, such as
THAT DO NOT
home devices being used for business purposes. In the first half of 2021, there were three significant assaults:
APPLY OR
NOBELIUM (the SolarWinds supply chain attack), HAFNIUM (an on-premises Exchange server attack), and
Colonial Pipeline (a ransomware attack). MAINTAIN
THESE BASIC
Many lessons can be learned. First, a continuing If compromised organizations had applied basic Recommendations for getting
threat vector is email compromise. In fact, phishing is security hygiene like patching, applying updates, or started with Zero Trust: HYGIENE PRACTICES
responsible for almost 70% of data breaches.91 Second, turning on multifactor authentication (MFA), they
cybercriminals are using malware that is posed as a may have been spared or less impacted. In fact, it • Identities are validated and secured with MFA WILL FACE MUCH
legitimate software update to target unsuspecting is shocking that less than 20% of our customers are everywhere. Using MFA helps eliminate the need
GREATER EXPOSURE
employees. Third, ransomware attackers have raised using strong authentication such as MFA93 (which for passwords. The added use of biometrics (such
the stakes to focus not only on double or triple is free to our customers and can be turned on by as retina eye scans or fingerprints) also ensures
TO ATTACKS.
extortion tactics in terms of a payout but are also default). Organizations that do not apply or maintain strong authentication of a user’s identity.
offering ransomware as a service (RaaS), which uses these basic hygiene practices will face much greater
• Devices are managed and validated as healthy.
a partner network to carry out an attack, making it exposure to attacks.
As a condition of access to any company resource,
tough to determine who the real bad actor is. Finally,
all device types and operating systems should be
adversaries are targeting on-premises systems, Along with the security basics, Microsoft relies on
required to meet a minimum healthy device state
reinforcing the need for organizations to move an approach called Zero Trust,94 which assumes the
before being validated.
infrastructure to the cloud where security is more network has been breached. Zero Trust means we
• Monitoring and threat signals are pervasive.
difficult to penetrate.92 don’t assume any identity or device on our network
Make sure to collect all available logs, data, and
is secure—we continually verify it. Zero Trust helps
signals to understand the current security state,
While these incidents taught us tough lessons, a key us strike a balance in making sure employees can be
which will help you identify gaps in coverage,
takeaway is that the basics matter. A primary way productive, secure, and healthy beyond the corporate
discover anomalies, and drive a better employee
criminals get in is through an unlocked door. network from home, the office, or anywhere in-between.
experience.
91Email scams in particular are surging, according to the cyber defense firm Barracuda. Phishing was responsible for almost 70% of data breaches. https://blog.barracuda.com/2020/03/26/threat-spotlight-coronavirus-related-phishing/
92Through 2024, workloads that leverage the programmability of cloud infrastructure to improve security protection will demonstrate improved compliance and at least 60% fewer security incidents than those in traditional data centers. (How to
Make Cloud More Secure Than Your Own Data Center, Neil MacDonald, Tom Croll (April 29, 2021)) 93Based on Azure Active Directory protection telemetry as of August 2021. 94Zero Trust Security Model and Framework | Microsoft Security MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 8899
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Our goal with this report is to share insights from health situations and local government guidance Global pre-COVID onsite work and the rapid move to remote work, followed by gradual return
our own internal teams who are doing this work determines how many employees we allow at a
each day, to help educate and empower others to worksite and what services are made available. Once
improve their cyber defense techniques to protect a location fully reopens, we return to somewhat
their employees, their companies, and our online normal operations with services that were provided
ecosystem. pre-pandemic. As Microsoft offices globally invite
more employees back to the worksite, we are
And remember, you can’t secure future work if you gradually seeing an increase in the number of
don’t secure your past work. employees badging-in (scanning their badges for
building entry) each week. We expect this number
Moving toward a hybrid will continue to rise as more locations fully reopen.
workforce at Microsoft However, we do not expect these numbers to reach
pre-pandemic levels of attendance. Our flexible
No one knows how or when the COVID-19
work approach means that we expect to see most
pandemic will end, but at some point, COVID-19
employees spending at least some time each week
will no longer place a significant burden on
working remotely, even in locations where COVID-19 Global weekly unique badge scans (January – August 2021)
our communities and will present itself more
is no longer a significant burden.
like an endemic virus such as influenza. Local
Learn more:
Securing a new world of hybrid work: What to know and what to do - Microsoft Security (5/12/2021)
Work Trend Index: Microsoft’s latest research on the ways we work.
The Next Great Disruption Is Hybrid Work—Are We Ready? (microsoft.com)
Securing Microsoft’s network with an internet-first, Zero Trust model (4/16/2021)
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 90
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
A Zero Trust an urgent opportunity for all companies around Assume breach 1. Identities
the world to adopt a Zero Trust approach and Minimize blast radius and segment access. Verify Identities can represent people, services, or IoT
approach for assume all activity, even by trusted users, could be end-to-end encryption and use analytics to get devices. When an identity attempts to access
an attempted breach. Signals across the industry visibility, manage insider risk, drive threat detection, a resource, verify that identity with strong
securing hybrid
highlight that every company needs to create a and improve defenses. authentication, and ensure access is compliant and
culture of security and modernize their approach to typical for that identity. Follow least privilege access
work
ensure they are protected. An integrated security principles.
philosophy and end-to-end
The increasing prevalence of cloud-based services, Zero Trust principles 2. Endpoints
strategy
mobile computing, Internet of Things (IoT), and Once an identity has been granted access to a
Zero Trust eliminates the inherent trust that is
“bring your own device” (BYOD) in hybrid work Zero Trust controls and technologies are deployed resource, data can flow to a variety of different
assumed inside the traditional corporate network.
environments has changed the technology across six foundational technology pillars. Each endpoints—from IoT devices to smartphones, BYOD
An effective Zero Trust architecture is designed to
landscape for today’s enterprise. Security pillar is a source of signal, a control plane for to partner-managed devices, and on-premises
reduce risk at every opportunity across the digital
architectures that rely on network firewalls and enforcement, and a critical resource to be defended. workloads to cloud-hosted servers. This diversity
estate. In practice, this means that every transaction
virtual private networks (VPNs) to isolate and In a Zero Trust architecture, they are interconnected creates a massive attack surface area. Monitor and
between systems must be validated and proven
restrict access to corporate technology resources by automated enforcement of security policy, enforce device health and compliance for secure
trustworthy before the transaction can occur. For an
and services are no longer sufficient for a workforce correlation of signal and security automation, and access.
effective Zero Trust strategy, we recommend these
orchestration.
that regularly requires access to applications and
guiding principles:
resources that exist beyond traditional corporate
Zero Trust across the digital estate
network boundaries. The shift to the internet
Verify explicitly
as the network of choice and the continuously
Always authenticate and authorize based on all
evolving threats led Microsoft to adopt a Zero Trust
available data points, including user identity,
security model. Zero Trust has become a priority of
location, device health, service or workload, data
enterprise security leaders around the world.
classification, and anomalies.
We are facing a moment of reckoning as the world
Use least privilege access
witnesses a rise in increasingly sophisticated and
Limit user access with just-in-time and just-enough-
expansive cybersecurity attacks. This reality—
access (JIT/JEA), risk-based adaptive polices and data
coupled with work entering its next great disruption,
protection to help secure both data and productivity.
the move to hybrid environments—has ushered in
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 91
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
3. Applications 5. Infrastructure Zero Trust adoption Hybrid workplace intent
Applications and application programming Infrastructure—whether on-premises servers, cloud-
The Zero Trust Adoption Report95 illuminates the
interfaces (APIs) provide the interface by which data based virtual machines (VMs), containers, or micro-
path of Zero Trust adoption across diverse markets
is consumed. They may be legacy on-premises, services—represents a critical threat vector. Assess
and industries. We hope that the learning gained
workloads moved to the cloud, or modern software for version, configuration, and JIT access to harden
by this research can help accelerate your own Zero
as a service (SaaS) applications. Apply controls and defense. Use logging and monitoring to detect
Trust strategy adoption, shed light on the collective
technologies to discover shadow or unsanctioned IT, attacks and anomalies, and automatically block and
progress of your peers, and provide insights on the
ensure appropriate in-app permissions, gate access flag risky behavior and take protective actions.
future state of this rapidly evolving space.
based on real-time analytics, monitor for abnormal
behavior, control user actions, and validate secure 6. Data
No single security risk area stands out as a primary
configuration options. Ultimately, security teams are protecting data. Data
starting point for Zero Trust strategy, as fewer than
should remain protected throughout its lifecycle
15% start with the same security risk area.
4. Network even if it leaves the devices, apps, infrastructure,
Organizations are beginning in different places,
All data is ultimately accessed over network and networks the organization controls. Use data
likely based on their needs and available internal
infrastructure. Networking controls can provide classification and labeling as context to encrypt,
resources. Most organizations approach Zero Trust
critical controls to enhance visibility and help minimize access to, control the flow of, and mask or
as an end-to-end strategy to be completed over
prevent attackers from moving laterally across delete sensitive information at the end of its useful
time. Eventually, they seek to adopt this strategy
the network. Segment networks (and do deeper or legally mandated life.
across all security risk areas to ensure even more
in-network micro-segmentation) and deploy real- The shift to a hybrid workplace is driving
protection against threats.
broader adoption of Zero Trust strategy. 81% of
time threat protection, end-to-end encryption, Learn more:
enterprise organizations have begun the move
monitoring, and analytics.
The critical role of Zero Trust in securing our world | toward a hybrid workplace, with 31% already
Microsoft Security Blog (6/30/2021) fully adopted.
95 Zero Trust Adoption Report 2021 Based on responses from 900+ security decision makers familiar with Zero Trust, in a mix of industries. Respondents from US, Germany, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 92
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Current zero trust implementation – security risk areas Identities as well as our investments in detection (malicious
IP address, password spray detection), have caused
a reduction in password brute-force attacks that
In Azure Active Directory we observe 50 million
use legacy authentication protocols, such as IMAP
password attacks daily, yet only 20% of users
or SMTP. The volume of attacks that we attribute to
and 30% of global admins are using strong
breach replay and password spray have decreased
authentications such as MFA.96 Password-based
significantly, while at the same time we are seeing
attacks remain the main source of Identity
a large increase in attacks attributed to phishing
compromise. However, other types of attacks are
or other more sophisticated techniques, such as
emerging, including consent phishing and attacks
credential harvesting with malware. The data shows
on nonhuman identities.
that bad actors have adapted their tactics to keep
compromising accounts.
Password-based attacks
Although blocking legacy authentication and
Azure AD is the front door to all Microsoft cloud
enabling MFA are still the most important defenses
services. Our sign-in service sees 90 billion
for any organization, phishing protection is
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to Zero Trust implementation, giving permission to start anywhere. authentication requests per day, which gives us becoming more relevant than ever. Even with
great visibility on identity attacks happening
MFA enabled, users can still have their credentials
across all our clouds. Password-based attacks on
phished by real-time man-in-the-middle phishing
user identities are still the most prevalent vector
tools that replicate the sign-in page and replay
Learn more:
of identity compromise. While password spray
the MFA prompt to collect the one-time password
Zero Trust Adoption Report (7/27/2021) and credential stuffing used to be the largest sent to the user. To protect from this type of attack,
vectors of identity compromise, in the last year,
Resources for accelerating your Zero Trust journey - Microsoft Security (5/24/2021) customers can adopt Fido2-based credentials (based
we observed a significant change of tactics by the
on a public key cryptographic key pair), such as
Zero Trust Security Model and Framework | Microsoft Security
bad-actor ecosystem. In the last few years, but most security keys or Windows Hello for Business.97
notably during the pandemic, Microsoft and our
customers have invested significantly in reducing
the attack surface for bad actors to compromise
Identity is more important than ever. Azure AD–backed accounts. The enhancement of
security posture (security defaults, MFA adoption,
password protection, legacy authentication block),
96 Based on Azure Active Directory protection telemetry as of August 2021. 97 All your creds are belong to us! - Microsoft Tech Community Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 93
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Monthly compromised users by attack category (June 2020 – June 2021) Rise in phishing emails using OAuth request URLs
Geo-distribution of IP addresses issuing Emerging trends in attacks the access tokens do not require knowledge of a Microsoft recommends limiting user consent to
password brute-force attacks in July 2021 user’s password, and the user’s password is never allow user consent only to apps from verified
OAuth consent phishing
shared with the attacker. Most importantly, as this is publishers.
In typical phishing, an attacker looking to steal
not a credential based attack, strong authentication
credentials will craft a convincing email, host a
requirements such as MFA do not prevent attacks Microsoft has deployed several defenses to counter
fake landing page, and expect the user to fall for
that use this technique. this trend, including specific machine-learning-
the lure. On a successful phishing attempt, the
based detections to identify, isolate, and disable
user credentials are passed on to the attacker.
In the last six months, the monthly average of malicious applications. Strategies that can help
Consent phishing is a bit different. This method
phishing emails using OAuth URLs has almost prevent such attacks include granular user consent
attempts to trick users into granting permissions
doubled. These phishing emails target a variety of policies, blocking consent-phishing emails, anomaly
to a malicious attacker-owned application and uses
legitimate cloud services such as Microsoft, Google, detection, and user awareness training.
the obtained access tokens to retrieve the users’
and Facebook. We are seeing an upward trend in the
account data. This is a very sophisticated attack as
number of unique emails with OAuth phishing links.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 94
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Attacks on nonhuman accounts The challenge of credentials in code is not a new
We saw a significant uptick in the volume of one. While most major vendors including Azure
attacks against applications and service principal DevOps and GitHub offer safeguards to flag such
identities.98 Unlike users, these identities are often credentials for removal, the practice persists. Those
more vulnerable because organizations do not credentials provide attackers a direct path into
consistently apply many of the typical safeguards an organization’s environment while flying under
such as strong authentication, rigorous lifecycle the radar in the Azure AD Audit logs. Microsoft
management, and security monitoring to this recommends that customers audit their engineering
category of accounts. As a result, we have seen artifacts, including code repositories for credentials.
attackers exploiting application identities that
already have a privileged role or are scoped to a Adoption of security posture
wide set of permissions. Unlike the typical “Initial
Strong authentication adoption
Access -> Privilege Escalation” attack chain,
For identities, verifying explicitly means ensuring
this attack vector gains initial access through a
the identities are using strong authentication when
compromised user or a leaked application credential.
accessing resources. Microsoft research shows that
requiring strong authentication can protect against
We have seen attackers who gain initial access
99.9% of the identity attacks because the majority
through a compromised user use their elevated
of the attacks are related to passwords. While
privilege to conduct reconnaissance to identify
As a result of these countermeasures, there was For more information on phishing trends and augmenting passwords can help defend against
applications with existing permissions, add a new set
an 89% increase in disabled apps from January to mitigation, see the State of cybercrime chapter of those attacks, eliminating passwords altogether
of application credentials if needed, and even assign
June 2021 compared to July to December 2020. this report. with passwordless authentication methods can
privileged roles to the application. As a result, the
Upon detailed investigation, we saw that the major provide the most usable and secure authentication
application behaves normally in the environment
malicious vectors have shifted from a multi-tenant Learn more: experience.
while still operating as a tool for the attacker.
phishing attack to an abusive type of attack.
Microsoft delivers comprehensive solution to battle Customers should conduct a review of application
As companies have been adapting their security
rise in consent phishing emails | Microsoft Security roles and permissions to conform to the principle
posture for remote work and a hybrid workforce,
Blog (7/14/2021) of least privilege and monitor their Azure AD Audit
we have seen over 220% increase in strong
logs for unfamiliar activity on applications and
Hackers don’t break in, authentication usage in the last 18 months.
service principals.
they log in.
98 Apps & service principals in Azure AD - Microsoft identity platform | Microsoft Docs Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 95
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Strong authentication usage in Azure AD Growth in Zero Trust access policy usage
Azure AD Conditional Access is a security policy engine for verifying explicitly and granting least privilege
access. In the last year, the number of conditional access policies deployed has more than doubled, as
organizations revamped their security postures to account for a remote workforce.
When a user accesses an application, administrators can use conditional access to configure which additional
requirements are enforced to grant access. As organizations embrace Zero Trust security principles, we have
seen greater adoption in managed device and managed app requirements in addition to MFA.
Most frequently required access controls in Azure AD (July 2020 – June 2021)
Microsoft enables security defaults for all new customers to ensure that everyone has at least a basic level of
protection, including controls like MFA for administrators.99
Tenants with security defaults enabled
99 Azure Active Directory security defaults | Microsoft Docs Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 96
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Legacy protocols: A preferred entry point for adversaries
Fortunately, end users and admins have begun making progress toward using modern authentication in
One of the leading sources of compromise in organizations is authentication from legacy protocols, such
their organizations.
as IMAP, SMTP, POP, and MAPI. These protocols do not support MFA, so they are preferred entry points for
adversaries. In fact, 99% of password spray and 97% of credential stuffing attacks use legacy authentication,
The hybrid world is largely “perimeterless,” so wrapping protections around identity and devices is critical. As
according to authentication data from Azure AD. Data from Azure AD reveals that the compromise rate for
part of Zero Trust, we also think the future is passwordless,100 and we will start to see that transition this year.
authentications using IMAP clients is 22 times higher than the compromise rate for authentications from
a browser.
Account compromise rate by authentication protocol (July 2020 – June 2021) Percentage of legacy authentication among monthly active users of Azure Active Directory
Over the past year, we have seen the percent of users with legacy authentication clients decrease over
30% to nearly 10% of users in Azure AD.
100 Preparing your enterprise to eliminate passwords (microsoft.com) Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 97
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Devices/Endpoints Recommendations for mitigating BYOD risk
To mitigate the increased risks of any BYOD model, it’s important to ensure constant verification of specified
security standards as well as validation of the identity of the device and user to gate control of critical company
What we’re seeing
resources. For example, you can block access to a personal device that has been jailbroken (modified to remove
Mostly driven by necessity as the world shifted to a remote or hybrid work model, users are working from
restrictions imposed by the manufacturer or operator) to ensure that enterprise applications are not exposed to
anywhere, from any device, more than any time in history, and attackers are quickly adjusting their tactics to
known vulnerabilities.
take advantage of this change. Enterprises are left weighing the benefits of enabling BYOD (allowing their end
users to access corporate resources that traditionally required VPN or on-premises access) against the increased
For more information on securing devices, see the Supply chain, IoT, and OT security chapter of this report.
risk of the same users unintentionally installing ransomware or other malware while performing non-work-
related functions on their personal devices. By enabling BYOD using a Zero Trust model, enterprises can reduce
Learn more:
provisioning costs and avoid additional hardware purchases for work-from-home use, but they need to be able
Protect Data and Devices with Intune | Microsoft Docs
to protect their corporate assets on these devices, while still allowing the users to perform non-work functions
on these same devices. Device compliance policies in Microsoft Intune - Azure | Microsoft Docs (4/29/2021)
What is Conditional Access in Azure Active Directory? | Microsoft Docs (1/27/2021)
Mobile device management (Intune data)
Sharp rise in mobile device management growth as workers moved from office to BYOD and home PCs
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 98
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Applications confidential data. For more on recent attack trends Learn more:
in this area, please see the Legacy protocols and
Build 2021: Build Zero Trust-ready apps with the Microsoft
OAuth consent phishing sections of this report.
identity platform - Microsoft Tech Community (5/26/2021)
Moving from legacy to Zero
Integrated Threat Protection | Microsoft Security
Trust–ready applications Using modern apps and data
Safeguard your multicloud resources | Microsoft Cloud MODERNIZED
solutions
As we move from a security model centered on
Security
the corporate network to one based on identities,
In a cloud-centric architecture, we treat our APPS AND
thousands of apps and services with internally facing
applications and data differently. With more user-
posture remain heavily reliant on network firewalls SERVICES
design models becoming available, engineers
and VPNs to isolate and restrict access. They were
no longer function as the only developers in
built around legacy authentication mechanisms, REQUIRE
an organization. Users are taking advantage of
keeping them grounded within corporate networks.
platforms and tools that offer no-code or low-code
USERS TO BE
These traditional architectures built for legacy apps
development methods to create business solutions.
were designed for lateral connectivity rather than
Organizations should invest in creating the right AUTHENTICATED
micro segmentation. They violate the fundamental
guardrails for these new paradigms. Tracking
principle of least privilege access and are more
cloud resources and applying correct policies and PRIOR TO
vulnerable to lateral movement across the network
templates help to ensure that modern solutions
by an adversary, which in turn could expose HAVING
immediately use the correct controls.
How do you modernize applications? Successfully deploy one of the three solutions listed here: ACCESS.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 9999
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Network Customers are using network segmentation for Most common network Top 5 most common protocols used in
organizing workloads and deploying firewalls for network exploit attempts (July 2021)
attack types
securing traffic across subnets, VNETs, to on-
A Zero Trust approach encourages organizations Azure Firewall blocks millions of attempted
premises, and to the internet. Customers are using
to assume they are always under attack and exploits daily. Our signals show that attackers
firewalls to control and enhance visibility into all the
that a security incident can happen at any time. most commonly used malware, phishing, web
network flows.
To be prepared with a setup that minimizes the applications, and mobile malware in their attempts
blast radius of such an incident, networks should at network attacks during July 2021. Also in
Web application firewall
be segmented when the layout is designed. July, there was a significant uptick in the use of
Web application firewalls (WAFs) have evolved from
Implementing these software-defined perimeters coinminers, a type of malware that uses the network
an initial focus on injection-type attacks, such as
with increasingly granular controls will increase to mine cryptocurrency.
SQL injection and cross-site scripting, to include
the “cost” to attackers to propagate through the
attacks from malicious bots and API abuses. When
network and thereby dramatically reduce the lateral The protocols leveraged most often in attacks were
combined with distributed denial of service (DDoS)
movement of threats. HTTP, TCP, and DNS, as they are open to the internet.
protection, WAF forms an integral part of defense-
in-depth strategy for protecting web and API assets. Top 10 network threats (July 2021)
What we’re seeing in Azure
Firewall signals
WAF over the past year has upwards of 25 billion
As migration to cloud accelerates, we are seeing that rules triggered on a per-week basis. Approximately
most new deployments are hybrid with connectivity 4% to 5% of incoming traffic on average is deemed
back to on-premises and configured for internet malicious and is blocked either at the network edge
breakout (micro perimeter) from Azure. All data is or at the regional data center depending on where
ultimately accessed over network infrastructure. WAF is configured.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 100
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
DDoS attacks There is also an uptick in DDoS attacks against IPv6 Attack duration Attack vectors, applications, and regions
this year. This is an indication that as more IPv6 is Microsoft’s DDoS Protection team continues to see involved
In our 2020 DDoS retrospective,101 we highlighted
adopted in the enterprise networks, the risk of DDoS that most attacks are of short duration, with 75.35% More than 35% of the attack volume targeted
shifts in the very active cyberthreat landscape. With
attacks on IPv6 will continue to increase. being 30 minutes or less and 87.60% being one hour HTTPS and 10% targeted HTTP. UDP attacks
the COVID-19 pandemic and an increase in internet
or less. This trend is similar to what we observed represented 43% of the overall attack vectors, with
traffic, DDoS attacks on internet-facing endpoints
Daily attacks and volume in 2020. amplification attacks accounting for 11% of attacks.
ramped up significantly. We continue to see similar
Compared to the latter part of 2020, the average Besides DNS and NTP reflection attacks, there has
trends in the first half of 2021 as well. The trend is
daily number of attack mitigations in the first half been a surge in remote desktop protocol (RDP) and
characterized by large TCP attacks, mainly SYN, SYN
of 2021 increased by 25% while the average attack datagram transport layer security (DTLS) reflection
ACK, and ACK floods and user datagram protocol
bandwidth per-public IP increased by 30%. Azure attacks.
(UDP) reflection attacks. Online gaming and the
DDoS Protection mitigated 1,200 to 1,400 unique
gaming vertical continues to be a very attractive
DDoS attacks every day in the first half of 2021. As
target of DDoS attacks. The majority of attacks on
of July 2021, the average attack size in 2021 (325
the gaming vertical have been mutations of MIRAI
Gbps) was 25% larger than in 2020 (250 Gbps).
botnets and low-volume UDP protocol attacks.
DDoS attack mitigations Attack Duration (July 2020 – June 2021) DDoS attack type (July 2020 – June 2021)
Over 96% of the attacks are of short duration
(<4 hours)
Number of unique DDoS attacks mitigated daily by Microsoft
101 Azure DDoS Protection—2020 year in review | Azure Blog and Updates | Microsoft Azure Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 101
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
The average packet size of TCP flood has been Learn more: Top 10 DDoS attack destination regions
much smaller compared to UDP attack packets. UDP
DDoS Protection and Mitigation Services | Microsoft
Fragment attacks averaged 1145 bytes per packet
Azure
while TCP invalid syn averaged 512 bytes. TCP attack
Azure DDoS Protection Standard documentation |
vectors such as SYN ACK, TCP Zero Seq, FIN-ACK
Microsoft Docs
and RST Floods averaged below 100 bytes per packet.
Europe, Asia, and the United States remain the most
attacked regions because of the concentration of
financial services and gaming industries in these
regions. The UAE has been increasingly hit by DDoS
attacks on government, oil and gas, telecom, and
healthcare industries/sectors.
Top source regions from where the DDoS attacks
originated were from Russia, Romania, Turkey,
Indonesia, Vietnam, and the Philippines, owing to
the prevalence of DDoS attack-for-hire services in
those regions.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 102
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Cybercriminal DDoS services buying loads to conduct ransomware, spyware, Starting in late June, the advertised cost of DDoS Learn more:
adware, and banking theft monetization services decreased back toward the equilibrium that
Between November 2020 and May 2021, the Sharing how Microsoft now secures its network with a
strategies. was observed until November 2020. This shift was
Zero Trust model - Inside Track Blog (4/22/2021)
average price of a DDoS attack increased over 500%.
likely caused by two factors. First, there was a recent
• Some antivirus products use outbound DDoS
The reasons for the price increase are multifaceted: Zero Trust networking: Sharing lessons for leaders
increase in the supply of fresh loads available for
attacks to detect malware. Therefore, the (microsoft.com) (1/5/2021)
purchase from the DDoS services. Second, there was
lifecycle of the bots used in DDoS attacks is
The rising cost of goods sold for DDoS services Lessons learned in engineering Zero Trust networking
a decrease in ads for premium DDoS services. The
shorter than it used to be, requiring the DDoS
has made them more expensive and resulted in a (microsoft.com) (1/5/2021)
margins for DDoS services were being squeezed by
service to continuously buy new loads to
decrease in supply relative to demand.
increased costs and lack of demand for high-priced
maintain their capabilities.
• The price for loads that are turned into DDoS
DDoS services, leading some of the premium DDoS
bots increased as demand for loads for all • Improved DDoS mitigation strategies make it
services to move from a “publicly available service”
monetization strategies increased beyond more complex to perform quality attacks.
in the cybercriminal forums to more private services
supply. (Loads are freshly infected devices
that don’t advertise.
which are sold to third parties, who install their It has become more common for actors that want
malware on the device.) Attackers have found to conduct DDoS attacks to rely on these DDoS
more effective strategies to monetize loads that services to conduct them. As a result, many attackers
are delivering more value than they would get no longer have the skills or infrastructure to conduct
using them for DDoS attacks. These include their own DDoS attacks. In other words, costs are
rising due to lack of alternatives.
Average price of DDoS attack services
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 103
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Infrastructure that should be considered. Therefore, it is crucial Learn more: Threat matrix for cloud storage
to understand the various security risks that exist
The evolution of a matrix: How ATT&CK for As the move to the cloud enables a more secure
in containerized environments, and specifically in
Containers was built | Microsoft Security Blog
hybrid workforce, organizations are also increasing
Infrastructure represents a critical threat vector.
Kubernetes.
(7/21/2021)
their dependency on cloud storage services. They
IT and applications infrastructure, whether on-
Threat matrix for Kubernetes (microsoft.com) require effective threat protection, mitigation
premises, in the cloud, or multi-cloud, is defined as
The MITRE ATT&CK framework is a knowledge base
(5/10/2021) strategies, and tools in place to manage access to
all the hardware (physical, virtual, containerized),
of known tactics and techniques that are involved
software (open source, first- and third-party, Secure containerized environments with updated their cloud storage. For example, Azure Defender
in cyberattacks. Started with coverage for Windows
threat matrix for Kubernetes | Microsoft Security Blog treats data-centric services, such as cloud storage
platform as a service (PaaS), SaaS, functions, and
and Linux, the matrices of MITRE ATT&CK cover
(3/23/2021) accounts and big data analytics platforms, as part
APIs), micro-services, networking infrastructure,
the various stages that are involved in cyberattacks
and facilities that are required to develop, test, Crypto-Mining Attacks Targeting Kubernetes Clusters of the security perimeter and provides prioritization
(tactics) and elaborate the known methods in each
deliver, monitor, control, or support IT services via Kubeflow Instances (6/9/2021) and mitigation of threats for data storage. As
one of them (techniques). Those matrices help
Microsoft cloud security researchers examined
and applications. It is an area where Microsoft organizations understand the attack surface in their Update: Help Shape ATT&CK for Containers
the attack surface of storage services, they noted
has invested tremendous resources to develop a environments and make sure they have adequate (2/18/2021)
potential risks to be aware of when deploying,
comprehensive set of capabilities to secure future
detections and mitigations to the various risks.
configuring, or monitoring a storage workload.
cloud and on-premises infrastructure.
We’ve produced a threat matrix for storage102 to
When the Azure Security Center team began
help organizations identify gaps in their defenses.
Collaboration with MITRE on
mapping the security landscape of Kubernetes, they
We expect the matrix to dynamically evolve as more
an ATT&CK-style matrix noticed that although the attack techniques are
threats are discovered and exploited, and techniques
different than those targeting Linux or Windows, the
The flexibility and scalability of containers encourage can also be deprecated as cloud infrastructures
tactics are similar. For example, a translation from
many developers to move their workloads to constantly progress toward securing their services.
OS to container clusters would be “initial access to
Kubernetes, an open-source system for automating
the computer,” which becomes “initial access to the
deployment, scaling, and managing containerized Learn more:
cluster.” So, the team created the first Kubernetes
applications. While Kubernetes has many
attack matrix: an ATT&CK-like matrix comprising Safeguard your multicloud resources | Microsoft Cloud
advantages, it also brings new security challenges
the major techniques that are relevant to container Security
orchestration security. Threat matrix for storage services - Microsoft Security
(4/8/2021)
Infrastructure represents a critical threat vector.
102 Threat matrix for storage services | Microsoft Security Blog Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 104
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
Data data security and compliance teams to reduce their privacy data footprint and surface of attack to and security principles as organization evolve their
exposure and manage risk. achieve sustainable compliance. These security and applications and infrastructures or take on new
compliance benefits can also be achieved by using business ventures.
Digital transformation and tech intensity103 have led
As valuable as data is to organizations, data value similar approaches with other sensitive or regulated
to exponential data growth, and organizations are
can drop faster over time than the risk associated datasets. Learn more
dealing with never-before-seen volume, velocity, with it.104 Accumulating sensitive data through
Azure Purview for Unified Data Governance |
and variety of data. This growth, combined with
management neglect is not only wasteful from Reducing the risk associated with data is not only
Microsoft Azure
increasingly remote workforces and cloud migrations,
a storage perspective but it can also be a recipe about pruning old data and securing it where it
Information Protection and Governance |
has created a complex data sprawl often pitting
for accumulating risk. In a rapid data growth resides now. It is also about reevaluating how the
Microsoft 365
security and regulatory requirements against the
environment, it is not difficult to envision that data organization conducts business with sensitive data
access business needs to deliver value from that data. Microsoft Information Protection in Microsoft
governance will increasingly have an impact on data going forward to ensure proper storage, access,
365 - Microsoft 365 Compliance | Microsoft Docs
security. flow, and lifecycle so that this sensitive data does
(8/26/2021)
Data governance is an integral not persist or propagate uncontrollably.
Microsoft Information Protection and Microsoft Azure
part of data security There is a lot to be learned and reused from recent
Purview: Better Together - Microsoft Tech Community
privacy initiatives. Successful organizations with Over time, this means reengineering high-risk
Organizations that effectively manage the lifecycle (12/7/2020)
mature privacy processes have inherently had to business processes and adhering to data governance
and flow of their sensitive data as part of their
combine data governance and security to minimize
Cumulative impact of unified data governance and security on sensitive data risk
business operations make it that much easier for
Information rights management use (July 2020 – June 2021)
Dip in the chart correlates to decreased usage during major holidays Data governance can maximize the business value of data while helping minimize the security and
compliance risk of that data.
103 How technology intensity accelerates business value – Microsoft Industry Blogs 104 Implement Your Data and Analytics
Governance Through 5 Pragmatic Steps. Published 6 July 2020 – ID G00729295 – By Guido De Simoni, Saul Judah Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 105
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
People Some guidance about insider preventative and detective controls that decrease to share files) are both initiatives that Microsoft has
risk through all stages of the insider threat attack undertaken to mitigate risk. As organizations work
risk in the hybrid workplace
path. In general, we should assume that the threat of toward increasingly advanced capabilities in the
Helping people adapt to new ways of working As described in this report’s sections on Zero Trust, it
loss to the organization or its stakeholders increases preventative control space, appropriate stakeholders
is key to any successful transformation. While is possible to give employees seamless information
as an attack progresses down the path. Preventative from across the organization should always be
organizations are empowering people to work access while mitigating the risk of inadvertent leaks.
controls such as awareness trainings that instruct the consulted. For example, before implementing any
securely when, where, and how they want, we have Regarding more malicious insider threats, using a
organization where to report insider threat concerns, preventative controls, verify with the business that
found the most successful are the ones who are also framework of common factors and patterns typically
or controls designed to limit risky behavior (such as protections still enable employees and contractors
empathetic to the end-user experience. seen helps to enable proactive detection. Microsoft’s
limiting the ability for those leaving the organization to perform their legitimate business activities.
Insider Risk program has adapted numerous
The previous sections of this chapter have presented
a view of the threat landscape across the six Insider threat attack path105
foundational pillars of Zero Trust, with key steps
we recommend taking to protect them. However,
it is imperative to remember that every step we
take to implement Zero Trust strategies impacts the
people within the organization—and that successful
implementation depends as much on them as it
does on the systems and tools we put in place. How
companies engage with their workforces around
remote work and security matters. We conclude
the chapter with a discussion about people, the
human element of any enterprise, and ultimately our
greatest asset.
Insider threat attacks share several common factors and patterns, which can be described in a critical-path
approach. Identifying indicators across phases of the critical path can help to enable more proactive detection.
105 Adapted from Eric Shaw and Laura Sellers, Application of the Critical-Path Method to Evaluate Insider Risks, Studies in Intelligence, 59,2. 2021 Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 106
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
The Insider Risk program leverages a variety of Key considerations for insider threat detections
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)
and signature- or rule-based detections, including AI and ML are not Rules and signature-based detections are better suited for some use cases
those from our Insider Risk Management solution, always the answer
to accomplish detection goals. While AI and ML are
Data is key An effective AI or ML solution requires understanding and acquiring the data to
incredible tools that help to decrease some of the
develop, train, and enrich the solution, as well as track performance metrics
noise associated with traditional rule-based alerts, it
is critical that the organization has the appropriate You still need people Human review of alerts and identification of tuning opportunities is critical –
people with the “tribal knowledge” of business- continue to “shift left”
acceptable behavior in the correct roles to create
Cybersecurity talent While security experts are still important, data scientists also bring valuable
trustworthy AI and ML models. This human input
pool is evolving skills to the table
takes standard supervised or unsupervised ML a
step further in predicting which alerts are the most
actionable for incident response teams. Lack of this
knowledge can create a pool of noisy alerts with
limited investigative value.
AI and ML are not always the answer
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 107
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction A Zero Trust approach for securing hybrid work Identities Devices/Endpoints Applications Network Infrastructure Data People
The empathy imperative To support the well-being of your people, it’s Learn more:
important to create channels and mechanisms to
Flexible work is here to stay and with that comes To Thrive in Hybrid Work, Support Flexibility in Work
listen to their concerns, providing an opportunity
Styles (microsoft.com) (9/9/2021)
several challenges and stressors. Teams have
to give and receive feedback and embrace
become more siloed this year, and digital exhaustion Insider risk: Protect company data with insider
collaboration. Taking a holistic, purpose-built
is a real and unsustainable threat. One in five global goodwill — Quartz (qz.com) (June 2021)
approach that can pull signals together into a
survey respondents say their employer doesn’t care Data security: Eliminating insider risk in the hybrid
cohesive view across an organization provides a
about their work-life balance.106 Fifty-four percent workplace — Quartz (qz.com)
better understanding of the relevant trends in the
feel overworked. Thirty-nine percent feel exhausted.
organization and better risk reduction. For this Learn about insider risk management - Microsoft 365
And trillions of productivity signals from Microsoft
Compliance | Microsoft Docs (3/17/2021)
reason, organizations are turning to ML to uncover
365 quantify the precise digital exhaustion workers
hidden signs of workplace risk such as inappropriate Reducing Code of Conduct and Regulatory
are feeling.
communications, threatening behavior, or actions Compliance Violation Risks - Microsoft Tech
that would negatively impact employees and the Community (5/12/2021)
A positive corporate culture mitigates risk
business. By identifying patterns and violations, Fostering safe communication at work - The
A recent study out of CyLab, Carnegie Mellon
technology can flag risk while intervention is still Washington Post (11/17/2020)
University’s Security and Privacy Institute, found
possible, while continuing our commitment to end-
Microsoft Customer Story-Avanade uses a light
that negative deterrence actions like employee
user privacy.
touch—and Microsoft Insider Risk Management—
constraints, monitoring, and punishment don’t work
to lessen insider risk (3/24/2021)
to reduce insider risk.107 What does work: putting
employee engagement, connection, and well-being
front and center.
Assume positive intent; mistakes happen.
106 Work Trend Index: Microsoft’s latest research on the ways we work 107 How a positive hybrid work culture can help you to mitigate insider risk - Microsoft Security (5/17/2021) MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 110088
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN TTHHEE SSTTAATTEE OOFF CCYYBBEERRCCRRIIMMEE NNAATTIIOONN SSTTAATTEE TTHHRREEAATTSS SSUUPPPPLLYY CCHHAAIINN,, IIOOTT,, AANNDD OOTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY HHYYBBRRIIDD WWOORRKKFFOORRCCEE SSEECCUURRIITTYY DDIISSIINNFFOORRMMAATTIIOONN AACCTTIIOONNAABBLLEE IINNSSIIGGHHTTSS TTEEAAMMSS
CHAPTER 6
Disinformation
Introduction
Disinformation as an emerging threat
Mitigation through media literacy
Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor
Campaign security and election integrity
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 109
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
Critical attention required on the increasing
INTRODUCTION:
sophistication and scope of disinformation
ERIC HORVITZ, CHIEF SCIENTIFIC OFFICER
Disinformation refers to the deliberate use of false information with the intention of influencing public opinion. THESE
Efforts to fabricate falsehoods for the purposes of manipulating the masses have a long history. However, new
METHODS
forms of disinformation have come to the fore over the last decade, enabled by advances in computing methods
ARE INJECTING
and infrastructure that have transformed the power, scope, and efficiency of disinformation campaigns.
NEW POWERS OF
Widely used consumer platforms and services, such as social media, creator platforms, search engines, and messaging
PERSUASION INTO
services, now provide state and non-state actors with powerful channels for distributing disinformation. Beyond
DISINFORMATION
channels, these services provide malevolent actors with ready-made tools to experiment, monitor, iterate, and
optimize the impact of disinformation campaigns. CAMPAIGNS.
Commercial online platforms have been harnessed by manipulated or taken out of context in disinformation individuals and groups and to generate personalized
these actors as engines of disinformation to power efforts, often with dramatic effects. However, technologies programs of disinformation aimed at influencing
messaging programs aimed at political influence, for generating deepfakes are providing malevolent actors beliefs, opinions, and actions.
polarization, and chaos. Disinformation strategies are with powerful, general palettes for fabricating behaviors
growing in sophistication, including the concerted use of and events. These methods are injecting new powers of The repurposing of consumer computing
multiple services108 to reinforce messages across platforms. persuasion into disinformation campaigns. infrastructure, use of tools for generating synthetic
media, and harnessing AI to guide psychological
On a second front, advances in machine learning (ML) In a third area of concern, artificial intelligence (AI) operations are troubling separately and in synergy.
and graphics have led to widely available tools for methods can be used by state and non-state actors to Together, they are supercharging disinformation,
fabricating high-fidelity audiovisual content, referred formulate and drive powerful psychological operations with grave implications for the health and vibrancy of
to as synthetic media and deepfakes. For decades, that leverage insights and data about human democracies that depend critically on educated and
photos and comments by political leaders have been cognition. ML and reasoning can be used to profile aware citizenries.
108 Characterizing Search-Engine Traffic to Internet Research Agency Web Properties | Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 (acm.org) MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 111100
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
What might we do in the face of these can be aimed at identifying primary locations Disinformation The general motive to spread disinformation is
developments? and organizational sources of disinformation. to damage the reputation of an entity, mislead
Finally, there are promising developments with as an emerging consumers about the information, or influence
We need to critically attend to the increasing technologies that employ a set of methods, including the outcome of a proscribed event. It is one of the
threat
sophistication and scope of disinformation—and to cryptography, security, and database technologies in greatest threats to democracy, open debate, and
engage on multiple fronts. First and foremost, we production tools and pipelines that serve to certify free and modern society.
need to invest deeply in modern media literacy, to the origin and history of edits to online media
Disinformation has been a steadily evolving method
educate people about how to understand, expect, content, referred to as the provenance109 of the Commodity cloud computing, open-source research,
of information warfare, most recognized in the
and recognize disinformation and misinformation. content. Exciting progress with media provenance AI tools and algorithms, and the speed and scale of
United States after the 2016 election, but well-
Work on media literacy extends beyond education and authenticity is being nourished by strong cross- social media have created a perfect storm for the
known globally since the Cold War. This approach
and includes efforts to provide new kinds of tools organization collaborations. rise of disinformation and malicious synthetic media
is high-stakes and effective for creating social
that can help people to critique the source and popularly dubbed deepfakes.110 AI techniques to
discord, increasing polarization, and in some cases,
veracity of news and information. Second, we need We are facing unprecedented disinformation create hyper-realistic digital falsification, also known
influencing the outcome of elections. Nation state
to support high-quality journalism, including trusted campaigns and related cyber operations by state as deepfakes, include manipulated audio, video,
actors with geopolitical aspirations, proponents
news organizations. It is essential to have committed and non-state actors. These campaigns target public images, and text, which will seriously challenge
of radical ideologies, violent extremists, and
reporters on the ground to see, hear, and report with awareness and knowledge with disinformation, while our ability to discern truth from falsehood. In this
economically motivated enterprises can manipulate
clarity on events and incidents. In addition, we need others target enterprise operations and confidence. report, we use the term “deepfake” as AI-generated
online narratives with easy and unprecedented reach
to assure the health and vibrancy of local journalism. It is important to stay aware of developments and manipulated media used for malicious purposes.
and scale, creating significant societal impact.
to come together to address the challenges with
On the technical front, there is promise in applying awareness, technologies, and policies. Addressing Mapping the problem
AI pattern recognition technologies to detect patterns the new and evolving challenges will take ongoing
of communications and content that reveal an intent investments, innovation, and activity on multiple
to deceive. Such work includes efforts to identify fronts. This important chapter reviews some
audiovisual and text-based media as fabricated. On of these challenges and provides insights on
another front, efforts in networking technologies directions forward.
109A promising step forward on disinformation – Microsoft On the Issues110 Despite its popular usage, this term technically refers to a specific type of
ML (a process by which exposure to large and diverse amounts of data allows a computer to improve its own performance) that uses layered neural
networks (computer processors connected in a way that mimics how information travels in the human brain) to enhance the accuracy of the ML
algorithms. Deepfakes use two algorithms: the first algorithm creates a video, and the second one tries to determine if the video is real or not. If the
second algorithm can tell that the video is fake, the first algorithm tries again, until the resulting image looks sufficiently believable. Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 111
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
In the attention economy, websites and platforms Parallels in cybersecurity polarization, influence election outcomes, disrupt Deepfakes
earn revenue from the time users spend on democratic principles, enable financial fraud, and
Cyberattacks compromise the confidentiality, Deepfakes are photos, videos, or audio files
them. This advertisement-based business model threaten life and property.
integrity, and availability of digital systems. The manipulated by AI in hard-to-detect ways. The
incentivizes recommendation engines and curated
difference between a disinformation attack and weaponization of deepfakes can have a massive
timelines with clickbait headlines and scandalous Both disinformation and cyberattacks are used by an
a cyberattack is the target; disinformation is also impact on an economy and national security.
news, opinions, and falsehoods. The timeline adversary to achieve disruption. A well-coordinated
an attack and compromise of our cognitive being. By eroding public trust in the media, deepfakes
curation algorithms give rise to creating echo disinformation campaign can fill the broadcast
While cyberattacks are exploits of computer undermine the credibility of journalism. As this
chambers, filter bubbles, and unintentional tribalism. and social channels with false information and
infrastructure to create disruption, disinformation credibility is eroded, deepfakes also give rise to the
Because of echo chambers and filter bubbles, noise, creating narratives that play with emotions
exploits human infrastructure (our inherent “Liar’s Dividend” phenomenon. In an environment
users predominantly see the content that matches and drown out the true narrative. This maneuver
cognitive biases, logical fallacies, and psychological where it is unclear what is real and what is fake, it
their beliefs, biases, and desires, reinforcing their is similar to a distributed denial of service (DDoS)
vulnerabilities), and the attack compromises logical, becomes easier to discount any inconvenient or
confirmation bias and filtering out opposing attack that floods the target services and networks
analytical, and critical thinking. unpopular truth as fake. As an example, deepfakes
viewpoints. Nefarious actors misuse the attention with superfluous requests to connect and overload
could enable a public figure to claim that their real
economy and take advantage of the advertisement the system to prevent legitimate requests from
We can therefore think of the threat posed by actions are just a fake.
business model to manipulate social media being fulfilled. Disinformation can also be used
disinformation and computational propaganda
narratives to create divisions and sow discord. for social engineering threats on a mass scale. Like
as cognitive hacking. A cognitive hack attempts The proliferation of deepfake technology can directly
phishing attacks to compromise IT systems for
to change the target audience’s thoughts and harm individuals. Deepfake pornography has been
“Filter bubbles” and “echo chamber” data extraction, disinformation campaigns play on
actions using disinformation to manipulate the way used to objectify and victimize people without
emotions, giving cybercriminals another feasible
they perceive reality. Nefarious actors accomplish consent, especially women or those who identify
method for scams. Deepfake videos and audio
cognitive hacks utilizing various techniques, as women. This revenge pornography is now a
can trick employees into releasing or sharing login
including manipulating, mis-contextualizing, or significant problem: over 96% of deepfake videos
credentials, which can then be used to gain access
misappropriating information. Ultimately, these
to an enterprise’s network.
hacks can create social discord, exacerbate
In the attention economy, users are increasingly exposed only to information that matches
their preferences (blue areas in the graphic). Filter bubbles represent algorithms that choose
content based on the user’s previous search histories and other online activity.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 112
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
are nonconsensual pornography.111 A person’s Mitigation universities, and social media companies have all in 2014, the government introduced multi-platform
reputation can be damaged beyond repair by a started to implement media literacy efforts, which information literacy and strong critical thinking as a
single deepfake video posted to social media. through media include resources such as labeling, contextualizing, core component of a national curriculum.117
Criminals can and will take advantage of AI and providing further reading or resources, and even
literacy
deepfakes to increase the effectiveness of scams gamified tools like online quizzes. Media literacy curriculum should help individuals
and other nefarious activities. We have seen recent understand information they encounter, evaluate
examples of business112 and romance113 fraud using Improving media literacy is vital to addressing the plausibility, verify the source and search for
Pew Center Research indicates that people are
audio deepfakes. Even after effectively debunking disinformation. Interventions should be contextualized other reputable sources on the topic, and interpret
increasingly concerned about their ability to
the deepfake, the damage remains. Deepfakes and tailored to the audience, starting from a young age context. In today’s online world with essentially
discern false information and sift through the
also present direct threats to society. Nefarious with curriculum for responsible digital citizenship limitless information available, these skills may
volume of information they encounter in their daily
nation state actors work around the clock to spread incorporated into standard civics education. Some not be intuitive, but are certainly ones that can be
lives.114Media literacy is one of the most effective
disinformation campaigns, which increasingly US states, most notably Florida and Ohio, have learned and sharpened over time. Further, media
tools available to improve individual resilience to
include deepfakes, to create ideological conflicts in already started piloting and developing media literacy education does not need to be confined to
disinformation. From helping people understand
democracies around the world. They have effectively literacy curriculum in classrooms.116 In Finland, when the classroom: these skills are universally relevant,
minor editorial corrections, to preventing fake news
used disinformation and empowered domestic the country was targeted with foreign influence especially for digital nonnatives, or anyone who
from gaining traction, and reducing the likelihood
actors to disrupt elections and undermine efforts operations and disinformation campaigns by Russia regularly consumes news and information online.
that foreign influences undermine an election, media
to contain the COVID-19 pandemic. Technology
literacy inoculates individuals by helping them think
innovations like replacing video codecs with deep Approaches to countering disinformation
critically about information they encounter.
neural networks are making it easier to create
deepfakes in live video calls.
Even a short intervention with media literacy
education has been shown to make a significant
Microsoft Research, in coordination with Microsoft’s
difference in understanding disinformation,
Responsible AI team and the Microsoft AI, Ethics
identifying the motivations and context, and
and Effects in Engineering and Research (AETHER)
reducing belief in inauthentic content.115 News
Committee, continues to develop technology
media organizations, technology companies,
for training and testing deepfake detection
technologies.
111 The State of Deepfakes: 2019 Landscape, Threats, and Impact | Sensity AI112 Thieves are now using AI deepfakes to trick companies into sending them money – The Verge 113 Romance Scammer Used Deepfakes to Impersonate a Navy Admiral
and Bilk Widow Out of Nearly $300,000 (msn.com) 114 Many Americans Believe Fake News Is Sowing Confusion | Pew Research Center (journalism.org) 115 A digital media literacy intervention increases discernment between mainstream and false
news in the United States and India. (2020) 116 Media Literacy Around the States | Media Literacy Now 117 https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jan/28/fact-from-fiction-finlands-new-lessons-in-combating-fake-news Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 113
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
Microsoft has and continues to develop media Disinformation community. Like its disruptive effect on social into another system), screen-scraping, and
literacy resources to help consumers discern discourse, such disinformation carries with it the aggregation of public information through
information. Ahead of the US 2020 elections, we as an enterprise potential to disrupt corporate decision making, human evaluation and automated means, are also
released two online quizzes, “Spot the Deepfake”118 create commercial confusion and discord, and sow prone to disruption, corruption, or nuanced
disruptor
and “Know My News,”119 aimed at raising doubts in the minds of employees, customers, and modification. To address this growing threat,
awareness about synthetic media technology and markets. The following three areas cover some of enterprise decision makers should evaluate
understanding news sources. It also released a the more common considerations that enterprises which of the enterprise’s critical information
Disinformation traverses a social diffusion chain
“VaxFacts Quiz”120 to heighten awareness around could prioritize to ensure preparedness to mitigate gathering and distribution processes could
comprised of both intentional and unsuspecting
COVID-19 misinformation as vaccines were the disruptive effect of disinformation. benefit from more resilient practices. Which
agents. Intentional actors include hackers,
becoming more widely available. Microsoft has inflection points, or points where information
disruptors, and other agents that generate or 1. Parallel to its effect through social media,
also developed a hybrid threat training curriculum is interchanged or interpreted, need more
propagate disinformation. These agents could disinformation has made its way into
that highlights how threat actors are increasingly rigor, controls, or other forms of checks and
include nation states targeting a society, industry, enterprise workflows that are dependent
using cybersecurity and disinformation attacks in balances? Based on this analysis, controls and
or social arena. They could also include agents on data collection, aggregation, and
tandem to accomplish their goals. These training even out-of-band crosschecks and validations
engaged in corporate counter-espionage activities distribution practices. These workflows and
modules have been customized for the political should be introduced to mitigate the threat of
or anti-competitive disruption. Unintentional agents data practices may be automated or manual
community, including political campaigns, parties, polluted or mischaracterized information that could
might include personnel, vendors and suppliers, in nature, and even more advanced practices,
and government entities, as well as for journalists potentially corrupt the data stream and subsequent
other partners and stakeholders, customers, and such as those leveraging AI capabilities, are
and human rights organizations. insights that are derived from the data.
even competitors that continue the propagation prone to breach. Sophisticated AI algorithms
of disinformation, often not realizing what they can be fooled, or their underlying models 2. Signals and data within the enterprise
Learn more:
are doing. They concurrently become victims and overwhelmed by excess disinformation and could be compromised through security
An update on our effort to help preserve and protect unsuspecting agents of disinformation. Through other types of information attacks, leading vulnerabilities or attacks and infused
journalism – Microsoft On the Issues (6/16/2021) these agents and other means of information to erroneous or anomalous insights and with disinformation. Instrumentation and
dissemination, a parallel and concurrent wave of outcomes. In general, automated practices threat signals for performance of enterprise
disinformation traverses or envelops the enterprise. face the threat of breach and corruption in resilience are often seen as having secondary
This wave can be simple and anticipated, like the absence of adequate detection, timely importance and are therefore not given the
the rise of a tide, or it can have the effect of an notification, isolation and eviction, and defense level of scrutiny that core or primary services or
unpredictable tsunami about to weigh down on in depth. In contrast, manual practices, such applications receive. Data and signal collection
an unsuspecting coastal village. In this case, the as copy/paste, swivel chair (entering data into are sometimes relegated to supporting
coastal village would be the enterprise information one system and then entering the same data applications and systems that are bolted on as
118 https://www.spotdeepfakes.org/en-US (in partnership with the University of Washington Center for Informed Public) 119 https://www.knowmynews.com/en-us (in partnership with NewsGuard)
120Do you know the Facts about the COVID-19 Vax? – NewsGuard (newsguardtech.com) Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 114
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
adjunct environments. Attackers and disruptors 3. Situational intelligence could be supplanted The impact of diminished confidence could
know this and strike where they believe with disinformation or nuanced in ways to drive higher pricing and impact production
weaknesses could exist. Their primary areas of generate bias or create doubt in the minds costs. Doubt in the enterprise’s ability to
reconnaissance include operational security of decision makers or front-line personnel. maintain a grip on prices, supplies, and
and control systems alongside discovery Situational intelligence includes threat suppliers could exacerbate disruption and
of code and configuration vulnerabilities, intelligence, crisis intelligence, disaster data, force accelerated timelines or induce imprecise
especially within secondary or supporting and other types of information that helps to or incorrect decisions. Alternatively, it could
systems. Successful attacks could disrupt increase an enterprise’s understanding of introduce latency or doubt in decisions, such
threat signals, or infuse misleading data, if an operating or competitive environment. as recovery, failover, or fallback. Disruptors
they are able to bypass intrusion detection. One of the key strategies of disruptors is could also try to diminish front-line confidence
Enterprise decision makers should reevaluate to supplant situational intelligence with in leadership by corroding confidence or by
the scope and security of their protected disinformation. This strategy is often deployed presenting false or inaccurate information
assets and associated instrumentation and in environments that are considered out-of- and leading or trailing indicators. Enterprises
signals and ensure that intrusion detection band or beyond the control and reach of the that are dependent on external sources of
perimeters around core or critical assets have enterprise, including social and other media intelligence for critical functions need to be
been set to encompass these areas as well. platforms, public sites and portals, and other vigilant about information they ingest or
This review includes evaluation of controls types of campaigns that could target the consume. Information gatherers and decision
that measure the effectiveness of network enterprise or its complex and myriad supply makers need to validate sources and have
segmentation, validate adherence to data chains. Disruptors sometimes generate so means of cross-checking intelligence. Rating
and signal classification schema, inbound much out-of-band disinformation that it systems and schema should be used, and the
and outbound traffic features and patterns, overwhelms facts and otherwise accurate veracity and provenance of the intelligence
classification of data and dependencies, and data. Their disruption tactics go beyond needs to be confirmed independently.
instrumentation that ensures data integrity the enterprise and its direct information,
as it traverses across systems, at rest and in extending often to suppliers and third-party
backups. Instrumentation and signals that affiliates. Their goal is to introduce doubt in
evaluate and indicate the performance of the minds of decision makers and/or front-line
critical systems should be cataloged and put personnel. Disinformation that could disrupt
through a security and operational review suppliers, logistics, deliveries, orders, and
for vulnerabilities and possible causes of fulfillment poses threats to the supply chain and
compromise and injection of disinformation. confidence in product and resource availability.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 111155
TTOOCC IINNTTRROODDUUCCTTIIOONN T THHE ES STATATTE EO OF FC CYYBBERERCCRRIMIME E N ANTAITOINO NS TSATTAET TE HTRHERAETAST S S U SPUPPLYP LCYH CAHINA,I NIO, TIO, AT,N ADN ODT O STE SCEUCRUITRYIT Y H Y BHRYIBDR WIDO WROKFROKRFOCER CSEE CSUECRIUTRYI T YD I S DINISFIONRFMORAMTIOATNIONAC T IAOCNTAIOBNLEA BINLSE IIGNHSTIGS H TTSE A M TSEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
Recommendations: Four-point • Categorize and record the content that was 3. Quantify the consequences of disruption. hot and cold backups, or active-active models of
manipulated or introduced so that patterns can By examining dependency maps of data flow, redundancy or concurrency. Information disruptors
plan for enterprise executives
be determined or detected. analysis, and the points at which humans and and attackers aggressively search for backup
As enterprises develop and mature their capabilities
systems were impacted, enterprise leadership facilities, dormant data stores, or unattended data
• Determine the means of propagation and
to respond to information disruption and
can estimate or calculate the consequences and and data services that are slated to be deprecated.
diffusion through the enterprise.
disinformation, there are new imperatives that are
collateral damage caused by disinformation and When they find a weakness in security controls,
emerging in the areas of security controls, threat • Identify characteristics of actors and agents to
disruption. The goal of such an examination is to not only do they threaten breach of data but their
classification, and analysis. To support and enhance the best ability that is available at the time.
quantify the blast radius of any potential disruption actions can also trigger potentially impactful privacy
the enterprise’s ability to improve its response, • Conduct candid and objective identification of and assess its severity on enterprise operations, incidents. Enterprise privacy and security teams must
prioritize mitigations to address the highest risks, corporate functions, processes, and systems functions, and reputation. The likelihood and take a closer look at controls, including security
and to make investments that propel or accelerate that consumed or were impacted by the impact of such disruption should be used to inform measures, encryption at rest and in transit, of
its corporate objectives, the following practices disinformation. investment in mitigations and controls and help primary data sources and any backups or alternate
could be leveraged as a starting point to develop
The net impact of the disruption or information prioritize safeguards that need to be implemented data stores. Gaps in these environments and
sustainable mitigations and improvements to
infiltration must be evaluated and eventually to give the enterprise the most appropriate controls must be reported to enterprise leadership
counter the effects of information disruption and
included in considerations of corporate liability. defense against the impacts of disruption and and prioritized to be addressed in a timely manner.
disinformation.
disinformation.
2. Assess the impact of manipulation or
1. Catalog enterprise exposures to disruption,
disinformation. 4. Assess privacy implications of disruption.
manipulation, and disinformation.
An emerging area for enterprise management and Disinformation and information disruption
Enterprises should begin with the arduous task of
human resources is to conduct impact analyses of campaigns sometimes attack or threaten customer
cataloging or keeping track of disinformation attacks
disruption and disinformation. Managers and human and other protected data, which can have significant
on their information systems and data. This catalog
resource departments should study the behavior privacy implications for enterprises. Primary sources
would be an addition to the catalog of threats and
of enterprise employees, partners, and customers or stores of such data are difficult targets as they are
attacks that are part of enterprise security controls.
as they reacted to disruption or interacted with kept deep inside the defensive network of controls,
• Include a classification of information disinformation. Security and data science teams intrusion detection, and layers of authentication and
manipulation and disinformation with clear should run A/B tests on AI and trained algorithms to authorization. Modern enterprise controls include
indicators of targeted outcomes and impact of ensure they have not been corrupted or their models Zero Trust approaches and tightly controlled or
the attacks. tampered with. Finance teams and economists could restricted access to data that is subject to privacy
• Note the sources of the attacks or information look at the costs of disruption, including opportunity regulations, controls, and guidelines. Sovereign
leading to their origins and motivation, if cost, and the liabilities associated with impact of rules and obligations might also apply. It is under
known. market confidence, revenue, growth, and operational such constraints and restrictions that enterprises
cost increases associated with disinformation. are expected to provide data resiliency, including
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 111166
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
Campaign Unique cybersecurity political campaigns. This can be as simple as Heading into the US 2020 Presidential election cycle,
establishing strong communication channels the AccountGuard program also offered enhanced
challenges in political
security and between campaign staff and the private sector to identity protection features and resiliency reviews
campaign security
ensure they have a point of contact if issues arise. to customers involved in the election. Organizations
election integrity
The structure and lifecycle of political campaigns It is also imperative for candidates to establish a that took advantage of these resources saw an
present unique cybersecurity challenges. Campaign culture of cybersecurity within their campaigns, not average increase of 18% to their Microsoft Secure
organizations comprised of a mixture of staff, just among the IT staff but inclusive of everyone Score. In addition to political customers, the service
Threats to democratic processes from cyber-enabled
volunteers, and consultants are often created and who interacts with the campaign. Relatively easy is available to other high-risk groups including
interference are a critical concern. Microsoft has
expanded rapidly once an individual declares their actions such as turning on multifactor authentication human rights organizations, journalists and media
shut down dozens of websites widely attributed to
candidacy. As a result, team members are often asked (MFA), utilizing a password manager for strong organizations, and healthcare organizations.
nation state actors that have been used to target
to use their own personal devices, including cell unique passwords, and using secure communication
elected officials and candidates, democracy-promotion
phones or laptops, throughout the campaign. Further, channels for campaign communications make a AccountGuard distribution
organizations, activists, and the press. We’ve also seen
with constrained budgets and limited IT expertise, tremendous difference in improving the resilience of
attempts by nation states to target and exploit key
decisions about which email and file sharing provider the entire organization.
building blocks of democratic systems, including voting
to use are more likely tied to personal preference
systems and political campaigns. We also endured the
than extensive security and risk evaluations. With Microsoft has developed a service to address the
calculated manipulation of social media platforms in
people regularly joining and leaving a campaign and challenges associated with campaign staff using
efforts to sow misinformation and disinformation.
utilizing a variety of personal devices to conduct personal devices and accounts for campaign
campaign business, it becomes difficult to manage business. Microsoft AccountGuard121 is a security
The Defending Democracy Program at Microsoft
and enforce strong cybersecurity practices. service that unifies threat detection and notification
was created to advance technology, increase cyber
across all accounts, and is available at no cost to
resilience, and engage with government, campaigns,
These realities expose political campaigns to campaigns utilizing Microsoft 365 products. When
and democratic stakeholders to address threats
significant cybersecurity threats, compounded further a campaign enrolls in AccountGuard, they can also
to democratic processes from cyber-enabled
AccountGuard is currently available in
by the asymmetric advantage that malicious actors extend coverage to anyone who interacts with
interference. In partnership with the rest of the
32 democracies around the world.
maintain in terms of sophistication, resources, and the campaign, including staff, volunteers, interns,
Microsoft Security community, the Defending
capacity. Political campaigns are high-value, high- consultants, and more. The service then provides
Democracy team has helped protect two major US
visibility targets, but may have as few as one person notification and remediation guidance in the event Learn more:
elections and dozens of national elections around
dedicated to cybersecurity for the organization. of a nation state threat or compromise on campaign-
the globe. This unique and important issue space Expanding AccountGuard protections for high-risk
related accounts. The service currently protects over
raises an interesting set of cybersecurity insights, customers in 31 democracies – Microsoft On the
It is critically important that we in the security 40,000 accounts for political customers, including
challenges, and solutions that we must address to Issues (3/9/2021)
community continue to raise awareness of political campaigns, political parties, technology
ensure that our democratic institutions remain secure.
cybersecurity issues and best practices within vendors, and elections departments.
121 https://www.microsoftaccountguard.com/en-us/ Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 117
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
Threats to election infrastructure against remote threat actors. Though some form of election. This event served as a good reminder that
connected or online voting systems are starting to rise vulnerabilities can be announced at inopportune
As the Microsoft security community partners across There are many
in popularity, they remain in the minority of systems. moments, and the security of an environment relies
the public and private sectors to secure election
on the ability to apply patches rapidly. Customers connected components
infrastructure, the differences between how cloud
Securing election systems who were using cloud infrastructure were secured
of an election beyond
and on-premises systems are used in elections
against this vulnerability significantly faster—often
UPDATES AND PATCHING
becomes clear, as well as the various types of just casting a ballot at
automatically and immediately—than those running
election technologies that must be secured. We form The primary recommendations for elections
on-premises servers that needed to be patched. the polls—from data
our threat models around three main categories of officials and private vendors who support elections
systems, each with unique security considerations IT is to have a comprehensive strategy to patch SHARED SERVICES integrity concerns,
and risk profiles. systems regularly and keep software up to date,
Unlike a private sector company that is typically in to disinformation, to
and to use MFA. This is particularly relevant to
charge of their entire IT estate, local governments
Globally, voting systems are statutorily required to any internet-connected systems, such as election protecting election
tend to share IT systems with their state, regional,
be always disconnected from the internet and are support technologies and back-office IT systems. and national-level counterparts. Although this can officials’ online identities.
effectively “air gapped” systems. Though this poses During the lead-up to the 2020 US election cycle,
be cost effective and beneficial from a management
certain challenges for maintenance and updating the ZeroLogon vulnerability (CVE-2020-1472122) was
perspective, it spreads out the risk of cyber intrusion
devices, it acts as an extremely effective mitigation announced, less than three months before the While many of these
from an unrelated government organization into an
elections department. For example, if a research lab things may be invisible
at a state-run university were compromised, because
to the average voter,
Voting systems • Vote casting systems (electronic ballot marking devices, “voting machines”)
of shared IT systems attackers could move laterally
• Vote tabulation devices (paper ballot scanners)
to attack a county election’s voter information each offers a potential
Connected • Voter registration databases portal. Furthermore, responsibility for maintenance pathway for an
election support • Election-night results reporting sites and security is often split between private service
systems • ePollbooks (voter check-in tablets) adversary to attack the
providers and local governments. Sharing services
• Information portals
highlights the need for network segmentation integrity of an election.
• Not regulated, connected to the internet, shared ownership Highest risk
wherever possible to limit the impact of a cyber
Election back- • Voter information portals incident that either starts within or could migrate to
office IT • Day-to-day workstations and server infrastructure
an elections organization.
• Email and files
122 https://msrc.microsoft.com/update-guide/en-US/vulnerability/CVE-2020-1472 Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 118
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
SMALL TEAMS AND SMALL BUDGETS Election integrity • Cryptography guarantees that no votes can MOVING OUT OF THEORY AND INTO
In some countries, including the United States, be changed after being cast without being REAL ELECTIONS
To address growing concerns in voter trust among
elections are not managed federally; each detectable. ElectionGuard had its first real-world pilot election in
election systems, and to help drive forward
municipality is responsible for running and • Ensures that no one specific individual’s vote Fulton, Wisconsin in February 2020 when it was added
principles of software independence, election
managing its own elections infrastructure. The can be revealed. to VotingWorks’ touchscreen ballot-marking devices
auditability, and security and cryptography,
asymmetric threat of advanced adversaries for a municipal election in Rock County. Hundreds of
Microsoft has developed and launched a project • Provides assurances that the system is recording
targeting local-level elections offices that are time citizens voted for the first time on devices running
called ElectionGuard. Microsoft ElectionGuard votes properly and not “changing votes.”
and resource constrained is of real concern. As ElectionGuard. After their ballot was cast, each voter
is a free open-source software development kit
• Allows interested third-party watchdog
discussed earlier in this report, advanced persistent received a verification code that they could take
designed to make voting systems more secure,
organizations to verify that the tally was
threat actors have IT knowledge and monetary home with them to check online that their unique
auditable, verifiable, and efficient. This is done by
summed properly, and that the system
resources that exceed the annual budgets of local vote had been included in the final election tally.
implementing principles of end-to-end verifiability
operated without errors.
municipalities. Therefore, steps must be taken by
and answers the question: How can I trust the
both the private and public sector to concentrate ElectionGuard is free, open-source, royalty-free
accuracy of an election outcome if I worry that the
Learn more:
cybersecurity talent and resources in a way that software, and all source code is publicly viewable on
software, hardware, transmission infrastructure, or
helps to offset and balance that asymmetry. LinkedIn post: What is ElectionGuard? (Microsoft on GitHub.123 Microsoft believes that election security
personnel responsible for conducting the election
the Issues) (3/27/2020)
could be untrustworthy?
To help elections organizations address these
concerns, the Defending Democracy team focuses
Unlike banking software or other high-security
heavily on securing and supporting customers using
industries, secret ballot elections require that an
cloud services to support their elections, in both the
individual’s data (votes) must be a secret to all
private and public sectors. Our goal is to use the
parties, and there can be no direct tie between
cybersecurity expertise at Microsoft to offset the
a person’s identity and their vote, other than the
asymmetric threats faced by local elections or small
acknowledgment that a voter has cast a ballot.
elections vendors.
ElectionGuard implements these end-to-end
Learn more:
verifiable features:
Keeping your vote safe and secure: A story from inside
• Enables every individual to verify that their
the 2020 election – On the Issues (microsoft.com)
vote is included in the final election tally,
Protecting political campaigns from hacking – with a unique verification code.
Microsoft On the Issues (5/06/2019)
• Ensures that no one specific individual’s vote
can be revealed.
123 https://github.com/microsoft/electionguard Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 119
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Disinformation as an emerging threat Mitigation through media literary Disinformation as an enterprise disruptor Campaign security and election integrity
should not exist in a vacuum, and independent Trainings as mitigation Countermeasures needed The technical countermeasures are not simple.
security researchers should be able to validate The synthetic media’s technological development
To date, Microsoft has trained more than 1,500 To ensure access to credible information and
the integrity of the software. To that end, we continues to outpace what is possible by algorithms
participants from the political, civil society, media, preserve freedom of expression, we need a
have implemented a bug bounty program where and other technologies. Technical solutions for
and human rights sectors on topics spanning multistakeholder and a multimodal approach. The
Microsoft will award the security community for deepfakes fall into two categories: (1) detection
cybersecurity and disinformation threats. These main objective of any countermeasure is to mitigate
finding vulnerabilities in the ElectionGuard software. and authentication and (2) provenance. Detection
trainings have been tailored to audiences around the negative societal impact of disinformation.
Since launching in October 2019, the program has of deepfakes and disinformation is difficult.
the world, including political campaign staff, political
awarded tens of thousands of dollars in bounties to Human-AI collaboration can help, but context,
parties, and other government entities in democratic Specifically, when it comes to malicious synthetic
researchers across multiple continents. In this way, cultural differences, and intent make it hard to
countries. Ahead of the US 2020 elections, Microsoft media, the approach must be twofold: (1) to reduce
security issues were discovered and responsibly decipher disinformation objectively. In the long
partnered with NYU’s Brennan Center for Justice the exposure to malicious deepfakes, and (2) to
reported by the community, all patches were term, provenance solutions will help. Media
and the CISA to train more than 400 US election minimize the damage it can inflict.
issued within 90 days of reporting, and potentially authentication, authoritative content, and
officials on topics including ransomware, pandemic
vulnerable code was never used by voters in standards akin to SSL/HTTPS for web traffic must
preparations, threat intelligence, and an election Media literacy efforts can be enhanced to cultivate
production election systems. Public trust in elections be developed for media. Technology that can
day simulation exercise. Further, Microsoft has a discerning public. Deepfakes will have a limited
is, in part, dependent on the independent auditability help “sign” the media to find the media publisher,
collaborated with PolitiFact at the Poynter institute adverse impact if media consumers use logical
of the systems and processes that support our machine-readable fingerprinting, and watermarking
to develop a hybrid threat training curriculum thinking and common sense to differentiate
elections. We continue to welcome the trained eyes technology to tamperproof media would reduce
exploring the intersection of cybersecurity and between fiction and reality. Deepfakes have such
of security researchers across the world to suggest media manipulation to effectively combat the
disinformation, as these threat vectors increasingly a potentially devastating impact because many
improvements to the service and to independently spread of deepfakes.
overlap, especially in regard to attacks against individuals assume that a video, a photograph, or
test ElectionGuard’s security and cryptography.
political and media organizations. an audio is real if it aligns with their preconceptions
and biases. Alternatively, often people believe it’s
Learn more:
Learn more: fabricated if it contradicts their beliefs. We’re not saying ElectionGuard
Hart and Microsoft announce partnership to make
Defending Democracy Program – On the Issues
elections more secure, verifiable – Microsoft On the makes it impossible to hack
We need meaningful regulations and appropriate
(microsoft.com)
Issues (6/3/2021)
laws to govern disinformation and deepfakes so voting machines; we’re saying
Microsoft wants to make voting more trustworthy. that, at the very least, the perpetrators are held
ElectionGuard makes it pointless
Its partnership with Hart InterCivic will help – CNN accountable. Without legislation and legal remedies,
(6/3/2021) to hack voting machines.
people are vulnerable to disinformation campaigns
Microsoft hopes this technology can help fix America’s and deepfake revenge pornography, fraud, and
elections (cnn.com) (2/22/2020) other harms. Of course, legislation must take a
balanced approach toward freedom of expression
and speech.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 120
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
CHAPTER 7
Actionable insights
Introduction
Summary of report learnings
Conclusion
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
Five cybersecurity paradigm shifts
INTRODUCTION:
ANN JOHNSON, CVP, SECURITY, COMPLIANCE & IDENTITY
In working with organizations from around the world, we recognize the need to enable people to work WE KNOW A
productively and securely and from a variety of non-traditional locations and a variety of devices. Through
COMPREHENSIVE
these interactions, we’ve learned a lot about the role that cybersecurity plays in helping organizations maintain
APPROACH TO
business continuity as we adapt to a hybrid work world. As a result, we anticipate five cybersecurity paradigm
shifts that will support the evolution of work in a way that centers on the inclusivity of people and data. OPERATIONAL
RESILIENCE MUST
1. The rise of digital empathy people and their ever-changing circumstances, 2. The Zero Trust journey is becoming
When we consider building security into the their diverse perspectives, and varied abilities. increasingly important INCLUDE CYBER
productivity experience, there can be a tendency For example, rather than requiring people to Zero Trust is an “assume breach” security
RESILIENCE.
to focus on security from purely a technology do unnatural things to engage with security, posture124 that treats each step across the
perspective. However, during times of constant which can also increase their likelihood of network and each request for access to resources
disruption and change, when people are getting distracted when busy, factoring in as a unique risk to be evaluated and verified. This
susceptible to increased stress reactions, the digital empathy leads to inclusion of security model starts with strong identity authentication
importance of digital empathy comes into professionals with a broader range of abilities, everywhere. Multifactor authentication (MFA)—
greater focus. Digital empathy involves thinking skill sets, and perspectives—for greater diversity which we know prevents 99% of credential
about the ways in which people behave and and effectiveness of cybersecurity solutions. theft125—and other intelligent authentication
engage with technology. In this way, sociology It also means developing technology that can methods126 make accessing apps easier and more
and humanities considerations are essential to forgive mistakes. secure than traditional passwords.
the evolution of technology and cybersecurity.
Digital empathy will be critical to how we As we look past the pandemic to a time when
Empathy isn’t just for in-person interactions. move forward as an industry. Whether it’s an workforces and budgets rebound, Zero Trust
By applying empathy to digital solutions, we organization—or an individual—our ability to be will become the biggest area of investment for
can make these solutions more inclusive. In empathetic will help us to understand and adapt cybersecurity. This means that right now, every
cybersecurity, that means building tools that during times of constant change. one of us is on a Zero Trust journey—whether
accommodate more diversity with respect to we know it or not.
124 Zero Trust Security Model and Framework | Microsoft Security 125 One simple action you can take to prevent 99.9 percent of attacks on your accounts (microsoft.com) 126 Azure Active Directory passwordless sign-in | Microsoft Docs MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 112222
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
3. Diversity of data matters events such as earthquakes, legal events such Summary of
Microsoft tracks more than 24 trillion daily as cyberattacks, and pandemics like COVID-19.
signals from a diverse set of products, services, Cloud technology helps organizations develop report learnings
and feeds around the globe. We were able a comprehensive cyber-resilience strategy
to identify new COVID-19-themed threats— and makes preparing for a wide range of
What became clear as we compiled this report is
sometimes in a fraction of a second—before contingencies less complicated due to its
how much technology is now baked into everything
they reached customers. This is just one scalability.
we do. We can’t afford to treat technology and cyber
example of how the power and scale of the
5. A greater focus on integrated security
risk as something separate and contained that IT
cloud has a clear advantage when it comes to
The first half of 2021 brought into stark reality
and security teams are left to manage on their own.
combating threats.
the agility and callousness of our adversaries.
The examples in this report show that criminals will
As one example, in the last year, the diversity of To uncover shifting attacker techniques
seek to exploit whatever technology we develop
data also allowed us to understand COVID-19- and stop them before they do real damage,
and introduce; the challenge is in understanding
themed attacks in a broader context. Microsoft organizations must be able to see across their
what form that will take. Because we can’t always
cyber defenders determined that adversaries apps, endpoints, network, and users. Facing a
predict how technology will be exploited, we need
were primarily adding new pandemic-themed new economic reality, organizations will also be
to assume that anything we create or use will be
lures to familiar malware.127 driven to reduce costs by adopting more of the
a potential target and prepare ourselves to be as
security capabilities built into their cloud and
4. The resiliency of a business is tied to its resilient as possible.
productivity platforms of choice. To maximize
cyber resilience
the effectiveness of security organizations,
Cyberattacks are increasing in frequency The key actionable learning from all the elements
tools must be fully integrated to improve
and sophistication and are deliberately of this report is that to minimize impact of attacks
efficacy and provide end-to-end visibility.
targeting core business systems to maximize we must truly practice good cyber hygiene,
the impact of the attack or likelihood of a implement architectures that support the principles
While digital acceleration will continue to influence
ransomware payout. With this context, we of Zero Trust, and ensure cyber risk management is
the paradigm shifts that shape our industry, one
know a comprehensive approach to operational integrated into every aspect of the business.
thing remains the same; security technology is
resilience must include cyber resilience.128 At
fundamentally about improving productivity and
Microsoft, we benefit from a strategy that The following section summarizes some of the key
collaboration through secure and inclusive user
focuses on four basic threat scenarios: Planful learnings reinforced by the findings and insights in
experiences.
events such as weather incidents, unplanned the report.
127 Exploiting a crisis: How cybercriminals behaved during the outbreak – Microsoft Security 128 Operational resilience in a remote work world (microsoft.com) MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 112233
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
The cybersecurity bell curve:
Basic security hygiene still protects
against 98% of attacks
Enable multifactor authentication Apply least privilege access Keep up to date Utilize antimalware Protect data
Make it harder for bad actors to utilize Prevent attackers from spreading Mitigate the risk of software vulnerabilities Stop malware attacks from executing Know where your sensitive data is
stolen or phished credentials by across the network by applying least by ensuring your organization’s devices, by installing and enabling antimalware stored and who has access. Implement
enabling multifactor authentication. privilege access principles, which limits infrastructure, and applications are kept solutions on endpoints and devices. information protection best practices
Always authenticate and authorize user access with just-in-time and just- up to date and correctly configured. Utilize cloud-connected antimalware such as applying sensitivity labels and
based on all available data points, enough-access (JIT/JEA), risk-based Endpoint management solutions allow services for the most current and data loss prevention policies. If a breach
including user identity, location, device adaptive polices, and data protection to policies to be pushed to machines accurate detection capabilities. does occur, it’s critical that security
health, service or workload, data help secure both data and productivity. for correct configuration and ensure teams know where the most sensitive
classification, and anomalies. systems are running the latest versions. data is stored and accessed.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 124
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
Cyber hygiene Apply least privilege access and secure the most Secure and manage devices (keep up to date) In systems where this is not possible, the
sensitive and privileged credentials An essential part of good cyber hygiene is environment should then be protected from other
Taking basic security precautions can help
When attackers breach an organization, they look ensuring that devices are kept up to date and systems and monitored to detect any unexpected
your organization prepare for and mitigate the
for privileged credentials to provide them with configured correctly. Use endpoint management traffic or attempts to compromise the systems.
overwhelming majority of modern cyber threats
access to sensitive information and systems. In software to enforce policies that ensure the correct
and helps to prepare for the evolution of threats
addition to using MFA to protect login to an identity configuration settings are deployed and that Use antimalware and workload protection tools
as technology advances. The “cybersecurity bell
and ensuring that they have least privilege to access systems are running the latest software. Wherever Antimalware and detection and response technologies
curve” shows the activities that will have the biggest
systems, the credentials that support that identity possible, take an evergreen approach to ensure all should be deployed across the ecosystem to prevent
impact on reducing threats. Some of those actions,
and provide access must be secured. Among other devices are constantly running the latest version attacks and provide warning of any anomalies
the impact they have, and recommendations for
things, this will help to minimize the impact and of software. This includes ensuring a means of or threats that may be attempting to breach the
implementing them are described here.
breadth of pass-the-hash-style attacks in the event updating every piece of software or application so environment. This includes OT and IoT environments.
that malicious code is already running on a local that there are no dependencies that prevent you For cloud systems, workload protection should be
Enable multifactor authentication
machine or network. This includes securing hardware from implementing the latest updates and patches. deployed across all systems from virtual machines
This continues to be the top recommendation as it
such as with a trusted platform module or hardware For those devices missing critical patches, restrict and containers to machine learning (ML) algorithms,
was last year. MFA can stop credential-based attacks
security module or using cloud authentication them from accessing sensitive resources. databases, and applications.
dead in their tracks. Without access to the additional
services that provide credential protection.
factor, the attacker can’t access the account or
The same approach should be taken for cloud Protect data
protected resource. The introduction of passwordless
Separate accounts should be used for privileged services, using cloud security posture management Good cyber hygiene as outlined in the previous
technology and architectures makes this easier for
access versus general internet and email access. to ensure that systems are configured correctly. four steps can protect data, but it is also important
employees and customers to use and also provides
Dedicated hardened workstations should be used Keeping software and systems up to date can be that organizations know which sensitive data they
more security than traditional text (SMS) or voice
for privileged accounts and to perform privileged easier in the cloud where update domains enable have, and ensure that they have appropriate steps in
approaches. MFA should be enabled on all accounts
tasks to prevent the chances of infection through migration to updated infrastructure for testing with place to protect it. In fact, there is often a regulatory
that support it, in a way that it is easy for all users
general internet activity and email. Using JIT/JEA the option to roll back easily if issues occur. requirement to do so. The General Data Protection
to use it. It’s also important to ensure that people
systems ensure they will only get exactly the rights Regulation (GDPR), for example, requires a risk-
understand that they should not approve an MFA
needed to perform a task and only for as long as For systems, such as OT, where updating software is based approach to protecting the data of residents
request unless they were trying to log in or access a
needed to undertake it. This should be combined not as easy, a strong inventory of systems is needed of the European Economic Area (EEA). To take a
system—many people automatically click to approve
with risk-based adaptive policies that deny access to to understand which equipment exists, and how risk-based approach it is important to know your
any pop-up that they receive. Digital empathy can
resources when there is any doubt over the hygiene vulnerable it may be to certain attacks. Incorporate data—to understand what is sensitive and what may
be useful in understanding this behavior and helping
of the account or device. add-on modules or replace hardware to ensure it be subject to regulatory requirements. While there
to nudge people toward less risky decisions.
achieves all seven properties of secured devices. have been standards for data governance and data
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 125
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
protection for over 30 years, many organizations Isolate legacy systems Integrate cybersecurity into accountability for the risks lie within the business
have struggled to implement them. As we move function. As the chapters in this report illustrate,
business decision making
Not every system is capable of running the tools to
into a world where we increasingly collaborate and addressing the threats that we face require a mix of
enable Zero Trust. For example, many operational Now that technology is an essential element of
share data, it’s important to ensure we understand technology, policy, and people expertise—as does
technology (OT) systems have long technology business operations—a process that has only been
what data we have, classify it accurately, and apply all business decision making.
lifecycles and may run operating systems and accelerated over the last 18 months—cybersecurity
sensitivity labels as appropriate. This practice will
software that can’t be updated. must be a factor in overall business decision
enable us to use information protection and data Every leader in the organization should consider
making and not just something that is left to the
loss prevention technologies to protect data with how they enable employees and customers to have
Network segmentation should be used to restrict
technology department.
more confidence. a better digital experience, while also considering
access to these systems. This can help to ensure
what’s needed to mitigate the associated risks. This
that operational technology is not exposed to the Treat cyber as a business risk
In the event of a breach, these practices can also includes consulting the cybersecurity team on how
risks from hybrid working, and that IoT devices and
help security teams to know where the most sensitive to manage the risks that arise as they undergo
Cybersecurity should no longer be viewed as a
sensors have access and connections only to the
data is and whether it was exposed to attackers. digital transformation. As this report shows, there
specialized risk that falls only within the purview
smart ecosystems they support.
are inherent risks in all the new technologies and
of the IT department. Technology expertise sits
Adopt Zero Trust principles business practices we adopt, and those risks must
in the IT department, just as expertise in financial
This means that rather than trying to run the
factor into any decisions about technology, policy, or
risk management generally resides in the finance
This report has highlighted the sophistication and modern and legacy alongside each other, we can
business practices.
department, but ultimate responsibility and
complexity of many of the attacks we are seeing and isolate these systems from exposure to the risks
why it is increasingly difficult to prepare to counter that come from a modern connected infrastructure
Cybersecurity’s role in digital transformation
these attacks. Zero Trust is important to reduce the and avoid having that legacy technology hold back
exposure of sensitive data by limiting the inherent modern architectures. It also allows monitoring of
trust within an organization that an attacker would the environment that hosts operational technology
exploit—especially when people are connecting and Internet of Things (IoT) devices to be highly
from everywhere and will not necessarily be coming focused on detecting and responding to unusual
from a “trusted” location. This is why adopting a activity in an environment where it may not be
Zero Trust approach is now a top priority for most possible to install software on the system.
organizations. In a world where it’s harder to predict
or prevent the attacker, it’s important to assume they
will get in and limit their exposure.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 126
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
Security decision makers should truly embrace a Build a third-party Use digital empathy in tools they need to understand appropriate behavior,
risk management mindset as they consider how the recognize attacks, and report unusual activity. A
risk program implementing security
steps they take can protect the organization, while culture of enablement, trust, and engagement will
controls
Partners, suppliers, and contractors interact with
also helping achieve operational goals. significantly improve reporting and provide earlier
data and applications connected to our corporate As we connect more and more systems together, warning of attacks.
Resilience includes environment all the time. Attackers are increasingly security can become more complex, but we need
cybersecurity targeting third-party providers to gain access to to ensure that we value diversity of skills, areas of Build security into productivity.
their systems and networks with a view to gaining expertise, work and learning style, and background, When you implement security controls, think about
In the connected world we live in today we need access to their customers. among other things. Do not expect or require the impact on the experience of those using it,
to consider resilience as a key success factor in
everyone to be technology experts, in the traditional whether employees or customers. What is their
everything we do. Digital transformation is bringing Ensure that the organization has a strong supply
sense of the term, in order to engage with the background, expertise, and cultural experience?
increasing complexity to our security solutions chain assurance process, built on an understanding
security of these systems. Any controls you put in place should consider
including greater collaboration with third parties and of your suppliers’ exposure to cyberattacks, how
the experience of those who do not have a
the expectation that systems will be available 24x7. they configure their systems to be secure, and what When you implement security controls, apply background in technology. Is it intuitive, can it be
The platforms we are building to support businesses steps they take to protect any information you share digital empathy to ensure that the controls you are understood, and does it fit into their workflow as
need to be fully resilient against attacks. with them. Ensure that you are managing your third- providing consider the environment in which those naturally as possible? Too much friction without
Cybersecurity and resilience should be considered party risk through robust service-level agreements, using the system are working and allow them to an understanding of why a control is in place can
together. Operational resilience planning should attestations, and shared assessments like SSAE 18 easily engage with the environment. For example: lead people to circumvent technology or ignore
include understanding the cybersecurity threats to SOC 1 and SOC 2, PCI-DSS, GDPR, and ISO 20001.
processes to get things done.
the system and making appropriate investment to
Invest in user training that educates and informs.
ensure continued success. Third-party access to systems should also follow Implement security training that helps employees If, in addition to training people, we ensure that
the Zero Trust principles you apply to your own understand the risks they face and the best way they security fits into their working practices rather than
It is crucial to implement strong backup and organization to limit exposure to attacks originating can help to protect the organization. This training those of a technology or cybersecurity professional,
recovery solutions, but it is equally important that from a compromise of their systems. should be ongoing and designed in a way that we increase the chance of their understanding the
organizations plan for how operational decisions will
increases engagement. User training is not just a risks and taking the appropriate actions. Where
be made in the event of a cyberattack and practice
compliance activity but an essential part of the early possible, cybersecurity should be invisible to the
their crisis management and response as well as
detection and response to an attack. Ensure that the user except where it can help nudge them to take
their technical response to incidents.
training you provide explains risks in the context of appropriate actions to manage risk.
the employees’ work, and provide the context and
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 127
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Introduction Summary of report learnings Conclusion
Conclusion A number of key themes arise throughout the • Any element can be used as an attack vector. • Zero Trust is an architectural principle.
different sections of this report that we encourage Attackers will look for the weakest link across The threats we have seen underline the
you to consider as you think about improving your an organization’s ecosystem, so we must importance of Zero Trust in designing and
As technology becomes more integral to our society,
security posture: manage it holistically. The weakest link may be managing the risk in an organization. The last
attackers are increasingly seeking to exploit this
a connected freezer or building management year has emphasized why there should be no
• Do the basics well.
cultural shift. From cybercriminals to nation state
system that is used to gain access to the such thing as a trusted application, trusted user,
A running theme throughout many of the
groups, these are sophisticated and well-researched
corporate network, or it may be a user or device or trusted device with unrestricted access. The
chapters is that, although attackers are
organizations with the resources, investments, and
that is compromised via a phishing email in risk and context of every connection needs
becoming more sophisticated, good cyber
research to deploy complex and well-informed attacks
an attempt to gain access to the operational to be considered before allowing access to
hygiene and implementation of basic security
against an organization. They are professional
technology running a factory or production resources. Zero Trust is not a technology but an
measures is often the best way to disrupt,
enterprises with their own sophisticated supply chains
plant. We need to consider and manage the approach to managing risk. When implemented
prevent, and detect their attacks.
and their own well-researched, well-engineered lures
organization’s entire attack surface. properly, it can enable us to unlock the
that seek to exploit the way your organization works. • Take a holistic view.
potential of modern technology while limiting
• Think about people.
Too often the way we organize security and risk
our exposure in a hyperconnected world.
People engage with technology and can be
As we increasingly do more of our work online, so do is driven by our own organizational structure
used as a way of gaining access to the digital
criminals and nation state attackers. You must take and siloes. Attackers will look for vulnerabilities
environment. Think about how to engage with
this realization into consideration as you plan digital across these siloes, so we need to consider risk
them in a way that will help them to understand
activities. For any new venture, consider the threat and the best approach to mitigating risk at an
the risks they face. Understanding, engaging,
alongside the opportunity, and think about how you organizational level. This may require some
and educating people will allow them to
can manage risk for your entire organization. standardization or translation of approaches
become a key line of defense against modern
across the different teams in an organization.
threats, whether that is misinformation seeking
This kind of thinking will require fundamental It also underlines the importance of standards
to influence peoples’ decisions and undermine
changes in the way we operate. We must consider as we seek to harmonize between companies,
democracy or phishing emails seeking to gain
risk as a whole and across the organization, rather which is increasingly important to managing
access to and compromise an organization’s
than within siloes or individual viewpoints. We must supply chain risk.
digital assets.
look at where we need to change the way we work,
and where we need to do the things we are already
doing—but better.
Microsoft Digital Defense Report | October 2021 128
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Contributing teams at Microsoft
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Contributing teams
Contributing teams at Microsoft
The insights in this report, as well as the actionable learnings above, have been provided by a diverse group
of security-focused individuals, working across dozens of different teams at Microsoft. Collectively, their
goal is to protect Microsoft, Microsoft customers, and the world at large from the threat of cyberattacks.
We are proud to share these insights in a spirit of transparency, with a common goal of making the digital
world a safer place for everyone.
Azure Networking, Core
A cloud networking team focusing on the Microsoft WAN, data center networks, and the software defined
networking infrastructure of Azure. This includes the DDoS platform, the network edge platform, and network
security products such as Azure Firewall and Azure WAF.
Cloud Security Research team
A team working to secure the Microsoft cloud and build security products, with a mission to protect and
empower customers to securely transform their organizations. The team’s focus is on research and feature
productization for Azure Defender, Security Center, and Azure Sentinel.
Customer Security and Trust (CST)
A cross-disciplinary team driving continuous improvement of customer security in our products and online
services. Working with engineering and security teams across the company, the mission of CST is to ensure
compliance and enhance security and transparency to protect our customers and promote global trust
in Microsoft. They formulate and advocate cybersecurity policy globally; advancing Digital Peace through
multistakeholder collaboration, focusing on Digital Safety to protect customers from harmful online content, and
collaborating with public and private organizations to disrupt cyberattacks and support deterrence efforts.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 113300
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Contributing teams
Cyber Defense Operations Center (CDOC)
Microsoft’s cybersecurity and defense facility is a fusion center that brings together security professionals from
across the company to protect our corporate infrastructure and the cloud infrastructure to which customers have
access. Incident responders sit alongside data scientists and security engineers from across Microsoft’s services,
products, and devices groups to help protect, detect, and respond to threats 24x7.
Defending Democracy Team
A Microsoft team who works with stakeholders including governments, nongovernmental organizations,
academics, and industry all in democratic countries globally to protect campaigns from hacking, increase political
advertising transparency online, explore technological solutions to preserve and protect electoral processes, and
defend against disinformation campaigns.
Detection and Response Team (DART)
A Microsoft team whose mission is to respond to security incidents and help Microsoft customers become cyber-
resilient. DART leverages Microsoft’s strategic partnerships with security organizations around the world and with
internal Microsoft product groups to provide the most complete and thorough investigations possible. DART’s
expertise has been leveraged by government and commercial entities around the world to help secure their most
sensitive, critical environments.
Digital Security & Resilience (DSR)
A Microsoft organization developed with a mission to enable Microsoft to build the most trusted devices and
services, while keeping our company safe and our data protected. Across the company, DSR is continually
evolving the security strategy and taking actions to protect Microsoft assets and the data of our customers.
Digital Security Unit (DSU)
A team of cybersecurity attorneys and strategic cyber intelligence analysts who provide legal, operational,
geopolitical, and technical subject matter expertise to protect Microsoft and our customers. DSU’s analysis and
proposed solutions to complex digital security problems help to build trust in Microsoft’s enterprise security
capabilities and defenses against advanced cyber adversaries worldwide.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 113311
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Contributing teams
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)
A team focused on key risks to Microsoft’s business objectives, the ERM team works across business units to
enable prioritized risk discussions with Microsoft’s senior leadership and, ultimately, the Board of Directors.
The team manages the company’s NIST Cybersecurity Framework internal assessment and the enterprise risk
framework, which connects to multiple operational risk teams, and coordinates with the company’s internal
audit function.
GitHub Security Lab
An open-source software-focused security research team. Its mission is to help secure the world’s code and
build bridges between the security research and software development communities through contributions
including security research, tooling, and meetups.
Global Cybersecurity Policy
A team that works with governments, NGOs, and industry partners to promote cybersecurity public policy that
empowers customers to strengthen their security and resiliency as they adopt and use Microsoft technology.
Microsoft AI, Ethics and Effects in Engineering and Research (AETHER) Committee
An advisory board at Microsoft that helps to ensure that new technology is developed and fielded in a
responsible manner.
Microsoft Customer and Partner Solutions
Microsoft’s unified commercial go-to-market organization responsible for field roles such as security and
technical sales specialists and advisors.
Microsoft Defender for IoT
A team composed of domain-expert reverse engineers and data scientists. The team continuously performs
reverse-engineering and analysis of large amounts of data related to IoT threats and threat actors to gain better
visibility into the IoT landscape and uncover related trends and campaigns.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 113322
TOC INTRODUCTION THE STATE OF CYBERCRIME NATION STATE THREATS SUPPLY CHAIN, IOT, AND OT SECURITY HYBRID WORKFORCE SECURITY DISINFORMATION ACTIONABLE INSIGHTS TEAMS
Contributing teams
Microsoft Defender Team
Microsoft’s largest global organization of product-focused security researchers, applied scientists, and threat
intelligence analysts. The Defender Team delivers innovative detection and response capabilities in M365 security
solutions and Microsoft Threat Experts.
Microsoft Digital Crimes Unit (DCU)
A team of attorneys, investigators, data scientists, engineers, analysts, and business professionals that fight
cybercrime globally through the innovative application of technology, forensics, civil actions, criminal referrals, and
public/private partnerships while protecting the security and privacy of our customers.
Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC)
Part of the defender community on the front line of security response evolution. For over 20 years, MSRC has
been engaged with security researchers working to protect customers and the broader ecosystem. An integral part
of Microsoft’s Cyber Defense Operations Center (CDOC), MSRC brings together security response experts from
across the company to help protect, detect, and respond to threats in real time.
Microsoft Threat Intelligence Center (MSTIC)
Microsoft’s centralized team focused on identifying, tracking, and collecting intelligence against the most
sophisticated and advanced adversaries impacting Microsoft customers, including nation state threats, malware,
phishing, and more. The threat intelligence analysts and engineering teams in MSTIC work closely with Microsoft
security product teams to both develop and refine high-quality detections and defenses across our security
product portfolio.
Security, Compliance, and Identity Business Development Team
A team that supports Microsoft security product teams in providing market insights into the latest cybersecurity
trends to inform product development decisions. The team works on building partnerships with independent
software vendors working with Microsoft’s security ecosystem.
MMiiccrroossoofftt DDiiggiittaall DDeeffeennssee RReeppoorrtt || OOccttoobbeerr 22002211 113333
© 2021 Microsoft. All rights reserved.