Ransomware:
the
to business 2024
Our Annual Global Study on Ransomware Business Impact
Attackers are evolving. Paying isn’t the solution. It’s time to reject the ransom.
1
Foreword
If I could have one wish for scrape public information on people And if there’s any evidence that your
and companies, which they use to payment was used to fund terrorism
2024, it would be that we
develop highly personalized social or organized crime, you could find
stop calling ransomware engineering attacks. Generative AI yourself facing criminal charges.
by the same name. also reduces the skills required to
So, what’s the takeaway this year?
codify attacks, lowering the barrier
It’s that the threat continues to evolve
of entry and increasing automation in
It fails to describe the true impact at pace while businesses’ ransomware
writing attacks, especially with tools
of an attack. What started as the resilience capabilities struggle to
such as wormGPT.
simplest of notions—encrypting keep pace. Now is the time to stress
data and extorting money to return This year’s research shows that, while test your capabilities, involve the rest
access to it—evolved into a complex most businesses have a ransomware of the business, and ensure you are
“Swiss army knife”, like the blended strategy in place, many are incomplete. sufficiently protected against today’s
attacks back in the early 2000s. They’re either missing a documented attackers as well as tomorrow’s.
plan or the right people to execute it.
Now ChatGPT has arrived on the Greg Day
As a result, we see that many
scene and it’s driving the next Global Field CISO, VP Cybereason
organizations are paying the ransom.
evolution of ransomware.
Likewise, whilst many have cyber
In last year’s survey, we began to see insurance, too many simply don’t
ransomware attackers have greater know if or to what degree it covers
success in non-English language them for ransomware attacks.
countries (Italy, Germany, France
This is problematic on several
and Japan). This trend is being
levels. It’s no guarantee that your
accelerated by generative AI tools
data and systems will be returned
that enable attackers to translate and
uncorrupted, that attackers won’t
localize their activities faster and at
sell your data on the black market,
scale. These tools also enable them to
or that you won’t be attacked again.
2
04
Objective:
Learn from those who
have been breached
06
The results
at a glance
10
What’s happening and
how to prepare for it
14
Conclusion:
It’s time to reject
the ransom
15
Make your business
invincible with AI-
powered protection
2 3
Objective: Learn from those
who have been breached
We also wanted to know:
•
How attackers are getting into networks
•
What they’re after
This report was commissioned to help Ransomware attacks are becoming
•
defenders share their experiences as more frequent, more sophisticated, How many breached organizations agreed
they work to educate their business and more effective. This year we to pay a ransom
peers on the importance of keeping wanted to find out how those who • Whether paying the ransom was worth it
ransomware at the top of the agenda. have been breached prepare for
future attacks.
We surveyed
1,008
enterprise IT
professionals
4
All
were responsible
for cybersecurity
24
All have been The results continue to surprise us.
breached at As you’ll see,
least once in organizations that
have been breached
the previous
in the past are still at
risk, and many of them
don’t think they’re fully
prepared for another
months. ransomware attack.
4 5
The results Attackers are evolving
at a glance
More complex, low-and-slow attacks are designed to compromise as much of the
5targeted network as p6ossible to exact the highest ransom in ‘RansomOps’ attacks.
%
This year’s results paint an
interesting picture. Despite being
breached before, many defenders
don’t believe their organizations
have the right people and plans in
place to manage the next attack.
said their organization
didn’t detect a breach
for 3-12 months.
How did they get in?
What were they after?
41 % 24 % 22 %
Intellectual Property Personally Identifiable
(IP)/ Trade secrets Information (PII)
Protected Health
Customer data
Information (PHI)
Account credentials got in via a supply got in directly. got in with the help
chain partner. of an insider.
6
78%
Paying the ransom isn’t the solution
Despite most victims agreeing to pay the ransom, less than half who did got their
8systems and data back u4ncorrupted. And most were breached again within a year.
%
But only
47 %
were then
breached again.
And
63%
got their data and
services back
paid the uncorrupted.
ransom.
of these were asked
Why did they pay the ransom? to pay more the
second time.
Attackers threatened to It was a holiday/weekend
disclose sensitive information and we were short-staffed
82%
were breached again within a year.
We feared loss of business It was a matter of life and death 36%
by the same actor.
42%
by a different actor.
It seemed to be the
We didn’t have backup files
fastest solution
6 7
The true impact is staggering
Average ransom payments
over the last 24 months:
Ransom fees remain high, and they’re just
the tip of the iceberg when it comes to the $1.4 million
true cost to a business.
USA:
46 $1 million
%
France:
$762k
Germany:
$423k
UK:
16%
estimate business estimate losses
losses of $1-10 million. of over $10 million.
The true cost is much higher and includes:
•
Brand damage
•
Lost revenue
•
Temporary closure
•
C-level resignations
•
Layoffs
8
37%
Businesses need to do more
Most organizations increased their investment in cybersecurity
after a breach, but the risk remains.
8Less than half of defenders say 7 they’re adequately prepared for
the next attack. %
have the right people
but not the plan.
18%
.
have the right plan
increased
but not the people.
cybersecurity spend.
Yet only
41 %
They’re investing in:
1. Cybersecurity talent
2. Awareness training
3. New tech (e.g. endpoint tech
& identity services)
4. Increased internal/supply
chain compliance
feel they have the right people and 5. Cyber insurance
plan to manage the next attack.
6. Cryptocurrency wallets 9
1/
What’s Attackers are becoming more effective,
thanks in part to generative AI
happening
and how to What’s happening
Businesses everywhere are working out how best to leverage
prepare for it generative AI to become more effective and efficient at scale.
And so are bad actors. They are using tools like ChatGPT 4.0 to
collect personal information, craft professional-looking messages,
and more effectively translate them into any language.
Attackers are making use of
generative AI and machine
How you can prepare
learning to find new ways into
networks and to scale their
Ensure all employees are aware of the increased risk
activities. At the same time,
of bad actors using these tools to create messages that
organizations are being held
seem less suspicious. Show them what to look out for
back by several challenges.
and run regular drills. Make sure all teams are following
basic good practice when it comes to security hygiene.
We have identified 6 core challenges and,
while none of these are easy to overcome, And work with a cybersecurity provider to secure
here is some advice on how to help your
critical systems and data. Some providers are now using
business prepare for each.
AI to automate ransomware detection and protection.
10
2/
The talent gap
continues to widen
What’s happening
Is generative AI dangerous? The global cybersecurity workforce may have reached record
levels, but the demand for skills still far exceeds the supply of
skilled workers. Hiring cybersecurity talent was the number one
investment being made by our respondents, but they simply can’t
In February 2023, researchers from match the pace required.
security firm Checkpoint discovered
that malicious actors had been able
to alter a chatbot’s API, enabling it to
How you can prepare
generate malware code and putting
virus creation at the fingertips of Increase efficiency so that you can make full use of the
almost any would-be hacker. cybersecurity staff you already have. This may mean
consolidating, automating, and outsourcing various
parts of your security and incident response capabilities.
You can read more about the MalOp™ and Cybereason’s
operation-centric approach here:
cybereason.com/platform#malop
Hear more on
this episode of our
Malicious Life podcast.
10 11
3/ 4/
Legacy systems increase Insurance only mitigates
network vulnerability a portion of the attack
What’s happening What’s happening
While most parts of the network are being migrated to Despite almost all respondents having cyber insurance,
the cloud, many critical systems remain offline or in dark only 40% are sure that a ransomware attack would be
networks. These may seem to be less at risk from an covered. Only around half of those who claimed from
attack, but they’re also less protected. And their critical their insurance after an attack recovered the full costs.
nature makes them ideal targets for social engineers,
who only need to find the weakest link once to access
passwords or gain physical access.
How you can prepare
Cyber insurance mitigates a portion
How you can prepare
of the total impact of an attack,
Don’t ignore offline or closed systems. so take the time to fully understand
Control access, ensure they are your organization’s cyber insurance
password protected, and teach policy(ies) against the true cost of
employees about the dangers of social a breach.
engineering. Secure these systems
by working with a cybersecurity
provider who can deploy lightweight,
non-intrusive security solutions.
When the Sellafield nuclear site hack was discovered,
investigators found several weaknesses including that
external contractors were able to plug memory sticks
into the system while unsupervised.
12
5/ 6/
Defenders need help It still doesn’t
planning for the next attack pay to pay
What’s happening What’s happening
Despite the high chance of falling victim to another attack, 84% of respondents said their organization paid the
only 41% of organizations are ready for the next attack and ransom. This makes sense of our finding that opening
the biggest gap is in the planning. a cryptocurrency wallet is a popular investment.
Unfortunately, most of those who paid didn’t get their
systems and data back uncorrupted. And 78% were held
to ransom again, with 63% saying they were asked to pay
How you can prepare more the second time around.
Focus on what you can control with
the resources available to you today. How you can prepare
The best way to start is by pressure
As we have seen for the last two years
testing your current incident response
running, it still does not pay to pay.
plan. Consider working with a cybersecurity
Prevention is always better than cure.
partner to conduct a ransomware risk
Put a stop to ransomware breaches by
assessment. The assessment should
partnering with a cybersecurity leader
consist of ‘tabletop exercises’ that simulate
with specific ransomware protection
a ransomware attack and test the people,
technology. When potential losses are
process, and technological aspects of
predicted to reach millions of dollars, you
your plan. The results will show you how
can’t afford not to protect your business.
to direct your resources.
12 13
Conclusion: It’s time to reject the ransom
Once again, we see that paying millions of dollars Help the business understand the real risk Invest in ransomware talent, planning
to ransomware attackers is not always the solution. of an attack and technology
It doesn’t guarantee that you will get all your systems
You can use the findings of this survey to help The tabletop exercises recommended in the
and data back uncorrupted, that your data won’t be sold
your business understand the true risk and previous section of this report will help you
on the black market, or that you won’t be attacked again.
cost of a successful breach by ransomware identify the weaknesses in your protection and
If anything, this survey shows that once a weakness
attackers. This should quickly raise the response planning. We recommend working
has been identified, you’re likely to be attacked again.
issue to the top of the agenda and help you with cybersecurity provider to cover all your
A much better approach to the scourge of ransomware secure sufficient investment to bolster the bases, but here are some recommendations
is to make your business invincible to attacks. And you organization’s security position. on how to get started:
can. But first, you need to help the business understand
the true risk and impact of an attack.
People Process Technology
Hire a cybersecurity expert with experience Work with the business to ensure it commits Turn the tables by investing in the very latest
in ransomware protection and empower resources to proper planning. Be sure to technology. Ensure it covers both online and
them to do more with less by automating engage all aspects of the business, including offline networks. And look for ransomware-
the protection of your data and systems. the Board (clarify who is responsible specific solutions that protect at every
Consider outsourcing elements of your for decision-making and that they are stage of an attack and include a roll-back for
security operations to fill any gaps, such as contactable after hours), PR and Marketing any impacted files as a last line of defense.
out-of-hours monitoring, or threat detection (for crisis management and customer Work with your vendor to deploy managed
and response services that can isolate communications), etc. Test your plans regularly. detection and response services with
machines automatically in the earliest 24x7x365 monitoring, helping to detect, halt
stages of an attack. and even remediate attacks within moments,
no matter when they occur.
14
invincible
Make your business
with AI-powered protection
With multi-layered protection, AI-powered endpoints, visibility
from the kernel to the cloud, and the only predictive ransomware
protection available, Cybereason is undefeated by today’s attackers
and ready for tomorrow’s. You can call upon a powerful combination
of solutions and services that deliver around-the-clock security,
optimized security operations, and the fastest detection, triage
and time to remediation on the market.
15
About Cybereason Survey methodology
Cybereason is the XDR company, partnering with Defenders to end attacks at the This research was conducted by Censuswide on behalf of Cybereason. A total of 1,008
endpoint, in the cloud, and across the entire enterprise ecosystem. Only the AI-driven cybersecurity professionals from organizations with 500 or more employees took
Cybereason Defense Platform provides predictive prevention, detection and response part in the online survey between September 25th and October 6th 2023. Participants
that is undefeated against modern ransomware and advanced attack techniques. are from the United States, United Kingdom, France and Germany. The survey sample
The Cybereason MalOp™ instantly delivers context-rich attack intelligence across includes responses from a variety of industries. IT and Telecommunications had the
every affected device, user, and system with unparalleled speed and accuracy. highest representation at 31%, followed by Manufacturing and Utilities (13%) and Retail,
Cybereason turns threat data into actionable decisions at the speed of business. Catering and Leisure (10%). Other industries include Architecture, Engineering and
Cybereason is a privately held international company headquartered in La Jolla, Building, Art and Culture, Education, Healthcare, Legal, Transportation, and more.
California with customers in more than 40 countries. Only organizations with at least 500 employees were surveyed. Those with 500-999
employees made up 87% of the group and those with more than 1000 employees made
Cybereason’s Ransomware Protection Capabilities up the remaining 13%.
Cybereason brings unique capabilities to our customers, ensuring they remain
undefeated against ransomware. Our unique combination of nine layers of endpoint
prevention (EPP), with Cybereason Endpoint Detection (EDR) integrated technologies
and our Managed Detection and Response (MDR) service combine to form a complete
ransomware protection solution that protects our customers across every stage of
the most advanced ransomware attacks.
The outcome: Customers are protected. One minute to detect, five minutes to triage
and 30 minutes to remediate attack. All day, all week, all year—including out of hours
and over the weekends (when attackers prefer to strike).