HIPAA Security SERIES 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities Security Topics What is the Security Series? 1. The security series of papers will provide guidance from the Centers for Security 101 for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) on the rule titled “Security Standards for Covered Entities the Protection of Electronic Protected Health Information”, found at 45 CFR Part 160 and Part 164, Subparts A and C. This 2. rule, commonly known as the Security Rule, Compliance Deadlines was adopted to implement provisions of the Security Standards Health Insurance Portability and No later than April 20, 2005 -Administrative Safeguards Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). The for all covered entities except small health plans series will contain seven papers, each focused 3. which have until no later on a specific topic related to the Security Rule. than April 20, 2006. Security Standards The papers, which cover the topics listed to -Physical the left, are designed to give HIPAA covered entities insight into the Security Safeguards Rule, and assistance with implementation of the security standards. While there is no one approach that will guarantee successful implementation of all the 4. security standards, this series aims to explain specific requirements, the thought Security Standards process behind those requirements, and possible ways to address the provisions. -Technical Safeguards This first paper in the series provides an overview of the Security Rule and its intersection with the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the provisions of which are at 45 5. CFR Part 160 and Part 164, Subparts A and E. Security Standards -Organizational, Administrative Simplification Policies & Congress passed the Administrative Simplification provisions of HIPAA, Procedures, and Documentation among other things, to protect the privacy and security of certain health Requirements information, and promote efficiency in the health care industry through the use of standardized electronic transactions. 6. Basics of Risk The health care industry is working Analysis & Risk to meet these challenging goals Security Regulation Management through successful implementation The final Security Rule can be of the Administrative 7. viewed and downloaded from the Simplification provisions of Implementation for CMS Website at: HIPAA. The Department of the Small Provider http://www.cms.hhs.gov/SecurityStan Health and Human Services (HHS) dard/ under the “Regulation” page. has published rules implementing a number of provisions, including: Volume 2 /Paper 1 1 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities (cid:1) Privacy Rule – The deadline for compliance with privacy HIPAA requirements that govern the use and disclosure of protected health Administrative information (PHI) was April 14, 2003, except for small health plans Simplification which had an April 14, 2004 deadline. (Protected health information, or “PHI”, is defined at 45 CFR § 160.103, which can be found on the (cid:2) Privacy OCR website at http://hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa.) (cid:2) Electronic (cid:1) Electronic Transactions and Code Sets Rule – All covered entities Transactions and should have been in compliance with the electronic transactions and Code Sets * code sets standard formats as of October 16, 2003. (cid:2) National Identifiers (cid:1) National identifier requirements for employers, providers, and (cid:2) Security health plans - The Employer Identification Number (EIN), issued by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), was selected as the identifier for *NOTE: The original employers. Covered entities must use this identifier effective July 30, deadline for compliance 2004 (except for small health plans, which have until August 1, 2005). with the transactions and The National Provider Identifier (NPI) was adopted as the standard code sets standards was October 16, 2002 for all unique health identifier for health care providers. The Final Rule covered entities except becomes effective May 23, 2005. Providers may apply for NPIs on or small health plans, which after that date.The NPI compliance date for all covered entities, had until October 16, 2003 except small health plans, is May 23, 2007; the compliance date for to comply. small health plans is May 23, 2008. The health plan identifier rule is The Administrative expected in the coming years. Simplification Compliance Act provided a one-year (cid:1) Security Rule - All covered entities must be in compliance with the extension to covered entities that were not small Security Rule no later than April 20, 2005, except small health plans health plans, if they timely which must comply no later than April 20, 2006. The provisions of the submitted compliance Security Rule apply to electronic protected health information (EPHI). plans to HHS. Who must comply? All HIPAA covered entities must comply with the Security Rule. In general, NOTE: The definition of the standards, requirements, and implementation specifications of HIPAA covered entities provided apply to the following covered entities: here summarizes the actual definitions found in (cid:1) the regulations. For the Covered Health Care Providers - Any provider of medical or other definitions of the three health care services or supplies who transmits any health information types of covered entities, in electronic form in connection with a transaction for which HHS has see 45 C.F.R. § 160.103 adopted a standard. which can be found at: www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa (cid:1) Health Plans - Any individual or group plan that provides or pays the cost of health care (e.g., a health insurance issuer and the Medicare and Medicaid programs). Volume 2 /Paper 1 2 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities HIPAA SECURITY (cid:1) Health Care Clearinghouses - Apublic or private entity that STANDARDS processes another entity’s health care transactions from a standard format to a non-standard format, or vice-versa. Security Standards: General Rules (cid:1) Medicare Prescription Drug Card Sponsors –A ADMINISTRATIVE SAFEGUARDS nongovernmental entity that offers an endorsed discount drug - Security Management program under the Medicare Modernization Act. This fourth Process category of “covered entity” will remain in effect until the drug - Assigned Security Responsibility card program ends in 2006. - Workforce Security - Information Access For more information on who is a covered entity under HIPAA, visit the Office Management - Security Awareness for Civil Rights (OCR) website at www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa or the CMS website and Training at www.cms.hhs.govunder “Regulations and Guidance”. An online tool to - Security Incident determine whether an organization is a covered entity is available on the CMS Procedures - Contingency Plan website, along with a number of frequently asked questions (FAQs). - Evaluation HIPAA SECURITY - Business Associate Contracts and Other Why Security? Arrangements Confidentiality - Prior to HIPAA, no generally accepted set of EPHI is accessible only by PHYSICAL security standards or general requirements for SAFEGUARDS authorized people and protecting health information existed in the - Facility Access processes Controls health care industry. At the same time, new - Workstation Use technologies were evolving, and the health Integrity - - Workstation Security care industry began to move away from paper - Device and Media EPHI is not altered or Controls processes and rely more heavily on the use of destroyed in an computers to pay claims, answer eligibility unauthorized manner TECHNICAL SAFEGUARDS questions, provide health information and Availability - - Access Control conduct a host of other administrative and EPHI can be accessed as - Audit Controls clinically based functions. For example, in - Integrity needed by an authorized - Person or Entity order to provide more efficient access to person Authentication critical health information, covered entities - Transmission Security are using web-based applications and other “portals” that give physicians, ORGANIZATIONAL nurses, medical staff as well as administrative employees more access to REQUIREMENTS electronic health information. Providers are also using clinical applications - Business Associate such as computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems, electronic health Contracts & Other Arrangements records (EHR), and radiology, pharmacy, - Requirements for and laboratory systems. Health plans are NOTE: Security is not a Group Health Plans providing access to claims and care one-time project, but rather POLICIES & management, as well as member self- an on-going, dynamic PROCEDURES & process that will create new service applications. While this means that DOCUMENTATION challenges as covered REQUIREMENTS the medical workforce can be more mobile entities’ organizations and and efficient (i.e., physicians can check technologies change. patient records and test results from Volume 2 /Paper 1 3 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities wherever they are), the rise in the adoption rate of these technologies creates an increase in potential security risks. As the country moves towards its goal of a National Health Information Infrastructure (NHII), and greater use of electronic health records, protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of EPHI becomes even more critical. The security standards in HIPAA were developed for two primary purposes. First, and foremost, the implementation of appropriate security safeguards protects certain electronic health care information that may be at risk. Second, protecting an individual’s health information, while permitting the appropriate access and use of that information, ultimately promotes the use of electronic health information in the industry – an important goal of HIPAA. The Privacy Rule and Security Rule Compared The Privacy Rule sets the standards for, among other things, who may have access to PHI, while the Security Rule sets the standards for ensuring that only those who should have access to EPHI will actually have access. NOTE: The Security With the passing of both the privacy and the electronic transactions and Rule applies only to code set standards compliance deadlines, many covered entities are EPHI, while the focusing on the security requirements. In developing the Security Rule, Privacy Rule applies HHS chose to closely reflect the requirements of the final Privacy Rule. to PHI which may be The Privacy Rule requires covered entities to have in place appropriate in electronic, oral, and paper form. administrative, physical, and technical safeguards and to implement those safeguards reasonably. As a result, covered entities that have implemented the Privacy Rule requirements in their organizations may find that they have already taken some of the measures necessary to comply with the Security Rule. The primary distinctions between the two rules follow: (cid:1) Electronic vs. oral and paper: It is important to note that the Privacy Rule applies to all forms of patients’ protected health information, whether electronic, written, or oral. In contrast, the Security Rule covers only protected health information that is in electronic form. This includes EPHI that is created, received, maintained or transmitted. For example, EPHI may be transmitted over the Internet, stored on a computer, a CD, a disk, magnetic tape, or other related means. The Security Rule does not cover PHI that is transmitted or stored on paper or provided orally. (cid:1) “Safeguard” requirement in Privacy Rule: The Privacy Rule contains provisions at 45 CFR § 164.530(c) that currently require covered entities to adopt certain safeguards for PHI. While NOTE: OCR within HHS compliance with the Security Rule is not required oversees and enforces the until 2005 for most entities (2006 for small health Privacy Rule, while CMS oversees and enforces all other plans), the actions covered entities took to Administrative Simplification implement the Privacy Rule may already address requirements, including the some Security requirements. Specifically, 45 Security Rule. CFR § 164.530 (c) of the Privacy Rule states: Volume 2 /Paper 1 4 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities (c)(1) Standard: safeguards. A covered entity must have in place appropriate administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to protect the privacy of protected health information. (2) Implementation specification: safeguards. (i) A covered entity must reasonably safeguard protected health information from any intentional or unintentional use or disclosure that is in violation of the standards, implementation specifications or other requirements of this subpart. (ii) A covered entity must reasonably safeguard protected health information to limit incidental uses or disclosures made pursuant to an otherwise permitted or required use or disclosure. (cid:1) The Security Rule provides for far more comprehensive security requirements than 45 CFR § 164.530 (c) of the Privacy Rule and includes a level of detail not provided in that section. As covered entities begin security compliance planning initiatives, they should consider conducting an assessment of the initiatives implemented for privacy compliance. NOTE: State laws that are contrary to the Privacy Rule and Security Rule are preempted by the Federal requirements, unless a specific exception applies. For more information, see 45 C.F.R. Part 160, Subpart B. Implementation Specifications An “implementation specification” is an additional detailed instruction for implementing a particular standard. Each set of safeguards is comprised of a number of standards, which, in turn, are generally comprised of a number of implementation specifications that are either required or addressable. If an implementation specification is required, the covered entity must implement policies and/or procedures that meet what the implementation specification requires. If an implementation specification is addressable, then the covered entity must assess whether it is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard in the entity’s environment. This involves analyzing the specification in reference to the likelihood of protecting the entity’s EPHI from NOTE: reasonably anticipated threats and hazards. If the covered entity Implementation specifications chooses not to implement an addressable specification based on its in the Security Rule are either “Required” or “Addressable”. assessment, it must document the reason and, if reasonable and See 45 C.F.R. § 164.306(d). appropriate, implement an equivalent alternative measure. See C.F.R. § 164.306(d)(ii)(B)(2) for more information. For each of the addressable implementation specifications, a covered entity must do one of the following: Volume 2 /Paper 1 5 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities NOTE: Addressable (cid:1) Implement the specification if reasonable and does not mean optional. appropriate; or (cid:1) If implementing the specification is not reasonable and appropriate – (cid:127) Document the rationale supporting the decision and (cid:127) Implement an equivalent measure that is reasonable and appropriate and that would accomplish the same purpose or (cid:127) Not implement the addressable implementation specification or an equivalent alternative measure, if the standard could still be met and implementing the specification or an alternative would not be reasonable or appropriate. If a given addressable implementation specification is determined to be reasonable and appropriate, the covered entity must consider options for implementing it. The decision regarding which security measures to implement to address the standards and implementation specifications will depend on a variety of factors, including: (cid:1) The entity's risk analysis – What current circumstances leave the entity open to unauthorized access and disclosure of EPHI? (cid:1) The entity’s security analysis - What NOTE: For more security measures are already in place or information about Risk could reasonably be put into place? Analysis, see paper 6 in this series, “Basics of Risk (cid:1) The entity’s financial analysis - How Analysis and Risk much will implementation cost? Management.” Overview of the Process The table of required and addressable implementation specifications included in this paper outlines the standards and implementation specifications in the Security Rule. In order to comply with the Security Rule, all covered entities should use the same basic approach. The process should, at a minimum, require covered entities to: (cid:1) Assess current security, risks, and gaps. (cid:1) Develop an implementation plan. Volume 2 /Paper 1 6 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities (cid:127) Read the Security Rule. Acovered entity should review all the standards and implementation specifications. The matrix at the end of the Security Rule is an excellent resource when developing an implementation plan, and is included at the end of this paper. (cid:127) Review the addressable implementation specifications. For each addressable implementation specification, a covered entity must determine if the implementation specification is reasonable and appropriate in its environment. A covered entity needs to consider a number of factors in making the decisions for each addressable implementation specification. (cid:127) Determine security measures. Acovered entity may use any security measures that allow it to reasonably and appropriately implement the standards and implementation specifications. (See 45 CFR § 164.306(b), Flexibility of approach) (cid:1) Implement solutions. Acovered entity must implement security measures and solutions that are reasonable and appropriate for the organization. (cid:1) Document decisions. Acovered entity must document its analysis, decisions and the rationale for its decisions. NOTE: The Security (cid:1) Rule requires that a Reassess periodically. Acovered entity must covered entity document periodically review and update its security measures the rationale for many of and documentation in response to environmental its security decisions. and operational changes that affect security of its EPHI. From 45 CFR § 164.306(b): Flexible and scalable standards Factors that must be The security requirements were designed to be technology considered - neutral and scalable from the very largest of health plans to the very smallest of provider practices. Covered entities will find (cid:2) The size, complexity and that compliance with the Security Rule will require an capabilities of the covered evaluation of what security measures are currently in place, an entity. (cid:2) The covered entity’s technical accurate and thorough risk analysis, and a series of documented infrastructure, hardware, and solutions derived from a number of complex factors unique to software security capabilities. each organization. (cid:2) The costs of security measures. (cid:2) The probability and criticality of HHS recognizes that each covered entity is unique and varies potential risks to EPHI. in size and resources, and that there is no totally secure system. Volume 2 /Paper 1 7 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities Therefore, the security standards were designed to provide guidelines to all types of covered entities, while affording them flexibility regarding how to implement the standards. Covered entities may use appropriate security measures that enable them to reasonably implement a standard. In deciding which security measures to use, a covered entity should take into account its size, capabilities, the costs of the specific security measures and the operational impact. For example, covered entities will be expected to balance the risks of inappropriate use or disclosure of EPHI against the impact of various protective measures. This means that smaller and less sophisticated practices may not be able to implement security in the same manner and at the same cost as large, complex entities. However, cost alone is not an acceptable reason to not implement a procedure or measure. NOTE: The security Technology Neutral Standards standards do not dictate Over the last few years, the emergence of new technologies has driven or specify the use of specific technologies. many health care initiatives. With technology improvements and rapid growth in the health care industry, the need for flexible, technology- neutral standards is critical to successful implementation. When the final Security Rule was published, the security standards were designed to be “technology neutral” to accommodate changes. The rule does not prescribe the use of specific technologies, so that the health care community will not be bound by specific systems and/or software that may become obsolete. HHS also recognizes that the security needs of covered entities can vary significantly. This flexibility within the rule enables each entity to choose technologies to best meet its specific needs and comply with the standards. Security Standards The security standards are divided into the categories of administrative, physical, and technical safeguards. Regulatory definitions of the safeguards can be found in the Security Rule at 45 CFR § 164.304. (cid:1) Administrative safeguards: In general, these are the administrative functions that should be implemented to meet the security standards. These include assignment or delegation of security responsibility to an individual and security training requirements. (For more information, see 45 CFR § 164.308 and paper 2ofthis series titled “Security Standards – Administrative Safeguards”.) (cid:1) Physical safeguards: In general, these are the mechanisms required to protect electronic systems, equipment and the data they hold, from threats, environmental hazards and unauthorized intrusion. They include restricting access to EPHI and retaining off site computer backups. (For more information, see 45 CFR § 164.310 and paper 3 “Security Standards – Physical Safeguards”.) (cid:1) Technical safeguards: In general, these are primarily the automated processes used to protect data and control access to data. They include using Volume 2 /Paper 1 8 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities authentication controls to verify that the person signing onto a computer is authorized to access that EPHI, or encrypting and decrypting data as it is being stored and/or transmitted. (For more information, see 45 CFR § 164.312 and paper 4 “Security Standards – Technical Safeguards”.) Acomplete list of the administrative, physical, and technical safeguards and their required and addressable implementation specifications is included at the end of this paper. In addition to the safeguards, the Security Rule also contains several standards and implementation specifications that address organizational requirements, as well as policies and procedures and documentation requirements. (See 45 CFR § 164.314 and § 164.316 of the Security Rule.) Resources The remaining papers in this series will address specific topics related to the Security Rule. Covered entities should periodically check the CMS website at www.cms.hhs.gov under “Regulations and Guidance” for additional information and resources as they work through the security implementation process. There are many other sources of information available on the Internet. Covered entities may also want to check with other local and national professional health care organizations, such as national provider and health plan associations. Need more information? Visit the CMS website often at: www.cms.hhs.govunder “Regulations and Guidance” for the latest security papers, checklists, and announcements of upcoming events. Visit the Office for Civil Rights website, http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa,for the latest guidance, FAQs, white papers and other information on the Privacy Rule. Volume 2 /Paper 1 9 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities Security Standards Matrix (Appendix A of the Security Rule) ADMINISTRATIVE SAFEGUARDS Implementation Specifications Standards Sections (R)= Required, (A)=Addressable Security 164.308(a)(1) Risk Analysis (R) Management Risk Management (R) Process Sanction Policy (R) Information System (R) Activity Review Assigned 164.308(a)(2) (R) Security Responsibility Workforce 164.308(a)(3) Authorization and/or (A) Security Supervision Workforce Clearance (A) Procedure Termination Procedures (A) Information 164.308(a)(4) Isolating Health Care (R) Access Clearinghouse Functions Management Access Authorization (A) Access Establishment and (A) Modification Security 164.308(a)(5) Security Reminders (A) Awareness Protection from Malicious (A) and Training Software Log-in Monitoring (A) Password Management (A) Security 164.308(a)(6) Response and Reporting (R) Incident Procedures Contingency 164.308(a)(7) Data Backup Plan (R) Plan Disaster Recovery Plan (R) Emergency Mode (R) Operation Plan Testing and Revision (A) Procedures Applications and Data (A) Criticality Analysis Evaluation 164.308(a)(8) (R) Business 164.308(b)(1) Written Contract or Other (R) Associate Arrangement Contracts and Other Arrangements Volume 2 /Paper 1 10 11/2004:rev. 3/2007 1 Security 101 for Covered Entities PHYSICAL SAFEGUARDS Standards Sections Implementation Specifications (R)= Required, (A)=Addressable Facility 164.310(a)(1) Contingency (A) Access Operations Controls Facility Security Plan (A) Access Control and (A) Validation Procedures Maintenance Records (A) Workstation 164.310(b) (R) Use Workstation 164.310(c) (R) Security Device and 164.310(d)(1) Disposal (R) Media Media Re-use (R) Controls Accountability (A) Data Backup and (A) Storage TECHNICAL SAFEGUARDS Standards Sections Implementation Specifications (R)= Required, (A)=Addressable Access 164.312(a)(1) Unique User (R) Control Identification Emergency Access (R) Procedure Automatic Logoff (A) Encryption and (A) Decryption Audit Controls 164.312(b) (R) Integrity 164.312(c)(1) Mechanism to Authenticate Electronic Protected Health Information (A) Person or 164.312(d) (R) Entity Authentication Transmission 164.312(e)(1) Integrity Controls (A) Security Encryption (A) Volume 2 /Paper 1 11 11/2004:rev. 3/2007